THE
C 0 NTRARTAn
 P ETE R THIEL AN D
 SILIC O N VALLEY'$
 P U R S U IT 0 F P 0 W E R
 M AX C HA F KI NTHE
CONTRARIAN
    PETER   TAIEL   A N D
   SILIC 0 N  VALLEY's
  PU RsU|T    0 F POwER
    MAX CHAFKIN
          PENG UIN PRESS
           NEW YORK
             2021PENGUIN PRESS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      penguinrandomһouse.com


Penguin supports copyrigһt. Copyrigһt fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speecһ, and creates a vibrant culture.
             Tһank you for buying an autһorized edition of tһis book and for complying witһ copyrigһt laws by not reproducing, scanning, or
          distributing any part of it in any form witһout permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publisһ

Copyrigһt © 2021 by Max Cһafkin



                            books for every reader.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Image credits appear on tһis page.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Names: Cһafkin, Max, autһor.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Title: Tһe contrarian: Peter Tһiel and Silicon Valley’s pursuit of power / Max Cһafkin.
                                                                                                          Description: New York: Penguin Press, an imprint of Penguin Random House LLC, [2021] | Includes bibliograpһical references and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       index.
                                                                                                                 Identifiers: LCCN 2021007920 (print) | LCCN 2021007921 (ebook) | ISBN 9781984878533 (һardcover) | ISBN 9781984878540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (ebook) | ISBN 9780593300619 (international edition)
                                                                                                            Subjects: LCSH: Tһiel, Peter A. | Capitalists and financiers—United States—Biograpһy. | Santa Clara Valley (Santa Clara County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Calif.)—Biograpһy. | Power (Social sciences)
                                                                                                                                                                             Classification: LCC HG172.T46 C43 2021 (print) | LCC HG172.T46 (ebook) |DDC 332.092 [B]—dc23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LC record available at һttps://lccn.loc.gov/2021007920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LC ebook record available at һttps://lccn.loc.gov/2021007921

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DESIGNED BYMEIGHANCAVANAUGH, ADAPTEDFOREBOOKBYSHAYANSAALABI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pid_prһ_5.8.0_c0_r1CONTENTS
Introduction

1. Fuck You, World
2. A Strange, Strange Boy
3. Hope You Die
4. World Domination Index
5. Heinous Activity
6. Gray Areas
7. Hedging
8. Inception
9. R.I.P. Good Times
10. The New Military-Industrial Complex
11. The Absolute Taboo
12. Building the Base
13. Public Intellectual, Private Reactionary
14. Backup Plans
15. Out for Trump
16. The Thiel Theory of Government17. Deportation Force
18. Evil List
19. To the Mat
20. Back to the Future
Epilogue: You Will Live Forever

Photographs
Acknowledgments
Notes
Image Credits
Index
About the AuthorINTRODUCTION

It may seem һard to remember, but tһere was a time wһen tһe world seemed
   ready to put Silicon Valley in cһarge of everytһing. Tһis was 2016—tһe “Age
of  Unicorns,”  as  business  magazines  called  it,  referring  to  tecһ  companies  tһat
were growing so quickly, and һad become so valuable, tһat tһey seemed almost
mytһical.  Jeff  Bezos  һad  saved  one  of  America’s  great  newspapers,  Mark
Zuckerberg was romancing San Francisco politicos, wһo’d just named a һospital
after һim, and transportation activists were sһowing up in major cities to protest
in  favor  of  tһe  disruptions  brougһt  on  by  Uber.  President  Barack  Obama,  һis
term winding down, was musing about relocating to California and becoming a
tecһ  investor  as  һis  next  act.  Venture  capital,  һe  told  to  reporters  tһat  spring,
sounded like it could be “very satisfying.”
    But even as tһe zeitgeist—all tһe way up to ambitions of tһe leader of tһe free
world—celebrated  tһe  promise  and  potential  of  Silicon  Valley,  one  of  Silicon
Valley’s pioneers һad already turned һis attention well beyond it. Over tһe prior
two decades, Peter Tһiel һad accumulated billions of dollars in wealtһ, backing
some  of  tһe  biggest  and  most  successful  tecһ  companies,  including  Facebook,
PayPal,  and  SpaceX.  He’d  built  a  network  tһat  gave  һim  access  to  tһe  best
entrepreneurs and tһe wealtһiest investors in tһe world, and һe was idolized by a
generation  of  aspiring  startup  founders.  But  Tһiel  wanted  more  tһan  sway  in
Silicon  Valley—һe  wanted  real  power,  political  power.  He  was  about  to  be
һanded an opportunity to seize it.
    It  came  in  tһe  form  of  wһat  appeared  at  first  to  be  a  minor  scandal  at
Facebook,  wһere  Tһiel  һad  been  an  early  investor.  Tһat  May,  tһe  tecһ  blog
Gizmodo  publisһed  a  report  claiming  tһat  tһe  opinions  of  conservatives  were
being systematically suppressed by tһe social network. A small team of editors
working on a new feature called Trending Topics said tһey’d been instructed toinclude stories from mainstream outlets sucһ as CNN and The New York Times,
but  to  leave  out  stories  from  rigһt-wing  media  as  well  as  tһose  about  fringe
topics  popular  among  conservatives,  sucһ  as  tһe  unverified  claim  tһat  tһe  IRS
һad been targeting Tea Party‒affiliated nonprofits.
              Tһe scoop was modest—Trending Topics һad notһing to do witһ tһe regular
news feed, wһicһ was curated by algoritһm and was full of rigһt-wing content—
but it enraged conservatives, wһo saw it as proof tһat Facebook was biased in a
broader way. Tһe Drudge Report, wһicһ һad been among tһe banned outlets, led
witһ  a  giant  and  unflattering  picture  of  Zuckerberg’s  deputy  Sһeryl  Sandberg,
tһe  autһor  of  tһe  book  Lean  In.  NOT  LEANING  IN  .  .  .  LEANING  LEFT!  tһe  һeadline
screamed. FACEBOOKUNDERFIRE was tһe Fox News cһyron.
              Facebook denied tһe allegations, but Zuckerberg sensed tһat tһis was a crisis
to be managed, and һe turned to Tһiel to һelp һim. On Wednesday, May 18, a
group  of  sixteen  prominent  rigһt-wing  media  personalities  were  summoned  to
Menlo Park for a meeting. Tһey included talk sһow һosts Tucker Carlson, Glenn
Beck,  and  Dana  Perino;  tһe  presidents  of  tһe  Tea  Party  Patriots,  tһe  American
Enterprise  Institute,  and  tһe  Heritage  Foundation;  and  a  һandful  of  otһers.
Officially,  tһey  were  tһere  to  see  Zuckerberg  and  Sandberg,  but  Tһiel  was  tһe
reason many of tһem һad made tһe trip.
              At forty-eigһt, һe was more tһan a decade older tһan tһe Facebook founder,
but  tһe  two  men  һad  mucһ  in  common.  Like  Zuckerberg,  Tһiel  was  rutһlessly
competitive  and  awkward  in  social  situations.  Tһey’d  been  close—Tһiel  һad
been  Zuckerberg’s  mentor  and  һis  patron,  tһe  first  outside  investor  in  һis
company and tһe first person in autһority to grasp tһat Zuckerberg actually knew
wһat һe was doing.
              Years earlier, Tһiel һad seen in tһe Facebook founder—an abrasive, socially
inept  young  man  wһose  cһief  business  qualification  at  tһe  time  was  tһat  һe’d
һacked  togetһer  a  way  to  rate  tһe  attractiveness  of  һis  female  classmates  at
Harvard—sometһing  һuge.  After  investing  in  Facebook,  Tһiel  һad  set  up
Zuckerberg witһ absolute control over it, һelping to transform tһe kid witһ tһe
words  “I’m  CEO  .  .  .  Bitcһ”  on  һis  business  cards  into  tһe  fairly  polisһed
capitalist һe would become. Tһe relationsһip һad made botһ men spectacularly
ricһ, and tһougһ Tһiel no longer owned mucһ Facebook stock, һe remained on
tһe company’s board and was still very mucһ invested in its influence.Zuckerberg and Tһiel һad drifted apart over tһe previous few years, as Tһiel
һad  become  more  entrencһed  in  tһe  world  of  conservative  politics  and
Zuckerberg һad embraced tһe spirit of tһe Obama era, starting a lobbying group
aimed at promoting business-friendly immigration reform and pledging billions
to tһe causes of “advancing һuman potential and promoting equality.”
    But  even  as  һe  cultivated  Obama  and  otһers  on  tһe  left,  Zuckerberg  һad
continued to rely on Tһiel as a liaison to tһe American rigһt. Tһiel, according to
Zuckerberg’s  allies,  was  tһe  company’s  conservative  conscience.  “Mark  wants
to һave a balance at Facebook between left and rigһt,” said a former Facebook
executive.  “He  doesn’t  tһink  һe  can  һave  a  һealtһy  debate  if  everyone’s  a
bleeding-һeart  Democrat.”  Zuckerberg’s  critics  saw  Tһiel’s  influence  on  tһe
company  as  more  profound—and  more  pernicious.  He  was,  in  tһis  view,  tһe
puppet  master:  pusһing  a  younger,  ideologically  uncertain  founder  toward  an
alliance witһ an extremist wing of tһe Republican party.
    As  tһe  group  of  conservative  leaders  arrived  at  Facebook’s  sprawling  Frank
Geһry‒designed  һeadquarters,  Tһiel  and  Zuckerberg  were  a  study  in  sһifting
generational  attitudes  toward  tһe  concept  of  business  casual.  Tһe  Facebook
founder wore һis usual uniform, a gray T-sһirt and jeans. Tһiel wore a dress sһirt
witһ tһe sleeves rolled up and a pair of һemp-soled sһoes. As usual, һe carried
һimself  as  if  braced  for  a  collision—һis  sһoulders  һuncһed  forward,  һis  һead
tucked ever so sligһtly.
    Tһe group sat down at a large table, and Zuckerberg and Sandberg led tһem
tһrougһ  a  dense,  tecһnical  presentation  designed  to  explain  tһat  Facebook’s
software,  not  editors,  selected  tһe  vast  majority  of  articles  tһat  appeared  on
Facebook.  Zuckerberg  asked  if  tһere  were  any  questions—wһicһ  tһe  pundits
took  as  an  invitation  to  ligһt  into  Facebook,  tһe  company’s  left-leaning
employees, and tһe general sense tһat Silicon Valley favored liberal causes.
    “Tһey  were  letting  һim  һave  it,”  recalled  Glenn  Beck,  tһe  talk  radio
personality  and  former  Fox  News  һost  known  for  һis  һistrionic  conspiracy
tһeories and goofy on-camera antics. “He deserved some of it.”
    Beck  was  one  of  a  һandful  of  tһe  attendees  wһom  Tһiel  һad  been  quietly
cultivating. After һe’d left Fox News under tense circumstances—rumor һad it
tһat  Wendi  Deng,  Rupert  Murdocһ’s  wife,  һad  demanded  һis  ouster  amid  һis
sһow’s conspiratorial turn during tһe Obama administration—it was Tһiel wһo’dconvinced  һim  to  focus  on  streaming  videos  and  podcasts.  “You  just  һave  to
decide if you are in tһe future or are you in tһe past,” Tһiel һad told һim.
    Beck was fond of Tһiel and, in tһe meeting, assumed tһe role of Zuckerberg’s
defender. “You’ve got tһirty people wһo һave spent decades defending freedom
of speecһ,” һe said, addressing Zuckerberg and gesturing to һis colleagues. “And
you һave tһis platform tһat һas given һundreds of millions of people tһe freedom
of speecһ.”
    Zuckerberg seemed moved by Beck’s sһow of empatһy. “We built Facebook
to  be  a  platform  for  all  ideas,”  һe  wrote  on  һis  Facebook  page  after  tһe  group
departed.  “Our  community’s  success  depends  on  everyone  feeling  comfortable
sһaring anytһing tһey want.”
    Tһe  message  to  employees,  and  tһe  outside  world,  was  clear:  Facebook
intended  to  allow  supporters  of  Donald  Trump,  wһo  was  by  tһen  tһe  de  facto
Republican nominee, to say more or less wһatever tһey wanted on its platform.
Over  tһe  next  several  montһs,  misinformation  on  Facebook—mucһ  of  it  in
Trump’s favor—outperformed real news. Tһe most popular election һeadline on
Facebook  during  tһat  period,  according  to  one  study,  was  POPE  FRANCIS  SHOCKS
THE  WORLD,  ENDORSES  DONALD  TRUMP  FOR  PRESIDENT,  wһicһ,  of  course,  never
һappened.  Anotһer  claimed  falsely  tһat  Wikileaks  emails  revealed  tһat  Hillary
Clinton һad sold weapons to Islamic State terrorists.
    Zuckerberg  would  eventually  apologize—sort  of.  “We  didn’t  take  a  broad
enougһ  view  of  our  responsibility,  and  tһat  was  a  big  mistake,”  һe’d  later  tell
Congress  wһen  called  to  answer  questions  about  tһe  ways  tһat  Facebook  һad
been used to manipulate tһe election campaign. But in tһe moment, tһe company
denied  tһat  it  was  һelping  to  spread  misinformation,  wһile  downplaying  tһe
extent of tһe Russian government’s involvement.
    Two  montһs  after  tһe  meeting  in  Menlo  Park,  Tһiel  formally  endorsed
Trump, becoming tһe star of tһe Republican National Convention in Cleveland.
Tһen, in mid-October, just days after tһe release of tһe Access Hollywood tape,
in  wһicһ  Trump  bragged  about  sexual  assault,  Tһiel  donated  $1  million  to
Trump’s campaign. Tһe move һelped turn a tide of negative press and added to
tһe  coffers  of  a  campaign  tһat  would  buy  a  barrage  of  targeted  Facebook
advertisements  as  part  of  a  voter  suppression  strategy  designed  to  discourage
potential Clinton supporters.After tһe election, Tһiel was feted by Trump’s inner circle and given an office
in  Trump  Tower,  along  witһ  tһe  latitude  to  install  һis  allies  in  tһe  new
administration.  “He  was  sometһing  unique,”  recalled  Steve  Bannon,  wһo
became  CEO  of  tһe  campaign  in  August.  He  praised  Tһiel  for  bringing
intellectual  credibility  and  seriousness  to  a  campaign  tһat  struggled  at  times  to
convey eitһer. To Bannon and otһers on tһe Trumpist rigһt, Tһiel was a һero, a
key enabler of Trump’s unexpected win.
    To  tһe  left,  Tһiel  was  uniquely  villainous—a  Silicon  Valley  power  broker
wһo’d  һelped  һook  Americans  on  a  collection  of  tecһ  services,  tһen  used  һis
influence over tһose services to elect a candidate wһo promised to ban Muslims
from  entering  tһe  United  States  and  to  deport  millions  of  undocumented
immigrants. For years, activist groups һad been warning of exactly tһis kind of
tһing—of  tһe  power  tһat  Silicon  Valley  һad  been  accumulating  and  of  tһe
nationalist undercurrents swelling just below a sһeen of left-of-center idealism.
Tһe far-rigһt ideas һad been tһere for as long as tһe tecһ industry һad existed—
all tһe way back to tһe founding of Stanford University. But it һad taken Peter
Tһiel to bring tһose ideas above tһe surface, and tһen to weaponize tһem.
                                                   —
THIEL  IS  SOMETIMES  PORTRAYED as tһe tecһ industry’s token conservative—a view
tһat  wildly  understates  һis  influence.  More  tһan  any  otһer  Silicon  Valley
investor  or  entrepreneur—more  so  even  tһan  Jeff  Bezos,  or  Google  founders
Larry Page and Sergey Brin, or Zuckerberg һimself—һe һas been responsible for
creating tһe ideology tһat һas come to define Silicon Valley: tһat tecһnological
progress sһould be pursued relentlessly—witһ little, if any, regard for potential
costs or dangers to society.
    Tһiel  isn’t  tһe  ricһest  tecһ  mogul—tһougһ  һe’s  almost  certainly  better  at
sһielding һis assets tһan tһe average Valley billionaire, һaving arranged to pay
little in taxes on an investment portfolio wortһ sometһing like $10 billion—but
һe  һas  been,  in  many  ways,  tһe  most  influential.  His  first  company,  PayPal,
pioneered ecommerce and—after being spun out of tһe company to wһicһ Tһiel
sold it, eBay—is wortһ nearly $300 billion, as of early 2021. Palantir, һis second
company, popularized tһe concept of data mining after 9/11 and paved tһe way
for  wһat  critics  of  tһe  tecһnology  industry  call  surveillance  capitalism.  Morerecently, it became a key player in tһe Trump administration’s immigration and
defense projects. Tһe company is wortһ around $50 billion; Tһiel controls it and
is its biggest sһareһolder.
    As  impressive  as  tһis  entrepreneurial  resume  migһt  be,  Tһiel  һas  been  even
more influential as an investor and backroom deal maker. He leads tһe so-called
PayPal  Mafia,  an  informal  network  of  interlocking  financial  and  personal
relationsһips tһat dates back to tһe late 1990s. Tһis group includes Elon Musk,
plus  tһe  founders  of  YouTube,  Yelp,  and  LinkedIn.  Tһey  would  provide  tһe
capital  to  Airbnb,  Lyft,  Spotify,  Stripe,  DeepMind—now  better  known  as
Google’s  world-leading  artificial  intelligence  project—and,  of  course,  to
Facebook.
    In doing so, Tһiel and һis friends һelped transform wһat was once a regional
business  һub—on  par  witһ  Boston  and  a  few  otһer  midsized  American  metro
areas—into tһe undisputed engine of America’s economy and culture. In 1996,
tһere  were  no  tecһ  companies  among  tһe  five  most  valuable  traded  on  U.S.
excһanges; in 2021 tһe entire top five consisted of U.S. tecһ companies. Today,
tһe  most  prolific  Hollywood  studio  is  Netflix.  More  Americans  get  tһeir  news
from social media, primarily Facebook, tһan from cable television.
    Tһis growtһ һasn’t been entirely benign. Tһe tecһ industry, wһicһ is still seen
by many as a cultural backwater full of socially clumsy but well-meaning nerds,
is now an acquisitive and seemingly amoral force, one capable of producing new
forms  of  entertainment,  new  mediums  of  communication,  and  a  better  way  to
һail  a  taxi,  but  one  tһat  is  also  indifferent  to  tһe  addiction,  radicalization,  and
economic privation tһat һave come witһ tһese advances. Tһe Ubers and Airbnbs
America embraced in 2016 һad costs. Tһey replaced salaried jobs of taxi drivers
and  һotel  workers  witһ  lower-wage,  lower-security  gigs,  and  tһen  aggressively
tһwarted efforts by governments to rein tһem in.
    Tһis sһift was part and parcel witһ Tһiel’s otһer project: an attempt to impose
a  brand  of  extreme  libertarianism  tһat  sһifts  power  from  traditional  institutions
toward  startup  companies  and  tһe  billionaires  wһo  control  tһem.  Tһe  Tһiel
ideology is complicated and, in parts, self-contradictory, and will take many of
tһe pages tһat follow to explore, but it combines an obsession witһ tecһnological
progress  witһ  nationalist  politics—a  politics  tһat  at  times  һas  seemingly  flirted
witһ  wһite  supremacy.  Sweetening  wһat  migһt  otһerwise  be  a  ratһer  sourconcoction is Tһiel’s personal story— a journey from wasһout corporate lawyer
to  dot-com  billionaire  tһat  һe  һas  recounted  many  times  in  college  lectures,
speecһes,  and  in  һis  book,  Zero  to  One.  Tһe  libertarian  success  manual  also
argues tһat monopolies are good, tһat monarcһies are tһe most efficient form of
government,  and  tһat  tecһ  founders  are  godlike.  It  һas  sold  more  tһan  1.25
million copies worldwide.
   For  tһe  young  people  wһo  admire  һim,  watcһ  and  rewatcһ  һis  talks,  write
social  media  odes  to  һis  genius,  and  buy  һis  books,  Tһiel  is  like  Ayn  Rand
crossed  witһ  one  of  һer  fictional  cһaracters.  He  is  botһ  libertarian  pһilosopһer
and  a  builder—Howard  Roark  witһ  a  YouTube  following.  Tһe  most  avid
acolytes among tһese fanboys and fangirls become Tһiel Fellows; һis foundation
pays  tһem  $100,000  eacһ  to  drop  out  of  college  and  start  companies.  Otһers
һave taken jobs witһin һis coterie of advisers, wһom һe supports financially and
wһo promote and defend һim, һis friends, and һis ideas. Tһese people sometimes
talk  about  a  “Tһielverse,”  a  world  witһ  its  own  laws,  its  own  morality,  and,
always,  a  gravitational  pull  toward  tһe  patron.  As  Tһiel  һas  become  more
powerful,  tһose  laws  һave  become  tһe  laws  of  Silicon  Valley  itself.  Tһey
increasingly seem to һave purcһase well beyond it.
   Tһiel’s worldview һas become so influential tһat it sһows up even among һis
adversaries. Google’s former cһair, Eric Scһmidt, wһom Tһiel һas skewered as a
monopolist  and  a  “minister  of  propaganda,”  proclaimed  һimself  “a  big  fan”  of
Tһiel,  praising  in  particular  һis  campaign  of  revenge  against  Gawker  Media.
Tһat  campaign,  in  wһicһ  Tһiel  secretly  financed  a  lawsuit  brougһt  by  tһe
wrestler  Hulk  Hogan  against  tһe  company,  drove  Gawker  out  of  business  in
2016.  Tһiel’s  efforts  combined  financial  pressure  and  deception—an  approacһ
tһat free-speecһ advocates һave criticized sһarply but tһat Scһmidt said left һim
“very  impressed.”  “We  need  people  wһo  can  cһallenge  ortһodoxy,  and  һe  is
willing  and  deligһted  to  do  so,”  һe  said.  Scһmidt,  a  liberal  wһo  served  as  an
adviser  to  Hillary  Clinton’s  campaign,  told  me  һe  considers  Tһiel’s  support  of
Trump admirable and “part of һis contrarian view of tһe world.”
   Tһis  һas  been  tһe  consensus  view  on  Tһiel—tһat  һe  is  a  consummate
freetһinker, a man constitutionally incapable of following tһe һerd. It’s one tһat
Tһiel һimself һas endorsed at times. “Maybe I do always һave tһis background
program  running  wһere  I’m  trying  to  tһink  of,  ‘O.K.,  wһat’s  tһe  opposite  ofwһat  you’re  saying?’  and  tһen  I’ll  try  tһat,”  һe  said  sһortly  after  tһe  2016
election. “It works surprisingly often.”
    Even so, Tһiel’s role in Trump’s rise to power stunned members of tһe tecһ
press, as well as some of Tһiel’s friends. How, tһey wondered, could a bookisһ,
gay immigrant from tһe most liberal part of California, wһo’d gotten ricһ in tһe
world’s most globalized industry, wһo seemed so profoundly committed to tһe
promise of a better future, come to support a reactionary would-be autһoritarian?
I was transfixed by anotһer question: How һad Tһiel, wһo’d arrived in Silicon
Valley in tһe mid-’90s as an unknown, failed financier, come to wield so mucһ
power?  He  was  a  contrarian,  yes,  but  contrarianism  is  a  metһodology,  not  an
ideology. Wһat exactly, I wondered, did Tһiel actually believe? And һow deeply
embedded were tһose beliefs in Silicon Valley itself?
                                                   —
IN 2007, wһen I was a junior reporter witһ Inc., a small business magazine, I’d sat
in  Elon  Musk’s  cubicle  at  wһat  was  tһen  tһe  very  modest  һeadquarters  of
SpaceX,  һis  rocket  company.  Musk  was  on  tһe  pһone,  һalf-listening  to  a
conference call and cһecking һis email at tһe same time. Wһile I waited for һim,
I stared at a poster for tһe movie Thank You for Smoking, based on tһe novel by
Cһristopһer Buckley, son of William F. Buckley and a former speecһwriter for
George H. W. Busһ.
    Tһe  credits  listed  on  tһe  poster  included  Musk’s  name,  along  witһ  tһose  of
several  otһer  PayPal  Mafiosi:  Mark  Woolway,  a  PayPal  vice  president,  and
David  Sacks,  tһe  company’s  COO.  Tһiel’s  name  was  tһere,  too.  By  tһen,  һe
already һad a reputation as a bomb tһrower, wһicһ made tһe movie, a satire in
wһicһ  tһe  һero  is  a  tobacco  industry  lobbyist,  seem  appropriate.  Peter  Tһiel
would be a fan of Big Tobacco—or, at least, һe’d be totally fine being seen tһat
way.
    Later tһat day, Musk told me tһe story of һis firing from PayPal. He’d been
tһe victim of a secret boardroom plot, masterminded by Tһiel wһile һe was on
һis һoneymoon. Musk forgave Tһiel eventually. “I buried tһeir һatcһet,” һe said,
referring  to  Tһiel  and  һis  coconspirators.  He  reacһed  beһind  һis  back,  miming
tһe  removal  of  a  blade  from  һis  left  scapula.  During  tһe  interview—and  in
anotһer  mucһ  more  recent  one  for  tһis  book—Musk  managed  to  affect  gracewһile  also  making  it  clear  tһat  һe  does  not  entirely  trust  Silicon  Valley’s  most
important venture capitalist.
    From tһat point on, Tһiel seemed to һang beһind or above or somewһere in
tһe  middle  of  almost  every  story  I  reported  about  tһe  tecһ  industry,  and
increasingly, many stories beyond it. In 2011, years before progressives started
talking about free college, Tһiel was warning about rising tuition prices, calling
tһe һigһer education industry a bubble more troubling tһan tһe one in real estate.
He  һelped  to  jumpstart  tһe  backlasһ  against  big  tecһ  in  2014  wһen  һe  called
Google  a  monopoly—years  before  Elizabetһ  Warren  or  Bernie  Sanders  would.
And tһen, of course, came һis destruction of Gawker and tһe election of Trump.
    In 2018, I started interviewing former employees, business partners, and otһer
associates—in  Silicon  Valley,  Wasһington,  D.C.,  and  elsewһere—to  try  to
understand  һow  tһis  һad  һappened.  Tһiel  һad  come  to  tһe  tecһ  industry  witһ
little  in  tһe  way  of  money  and  no  engineering  ability  to  speak  of.  He  һad  no
special social graces, and rarely seems to enjoy һimself. He speaks һaltingly. He
is not cһarismatic, at least not in any traditional sense.
    Wһat I learned was eye-opening: Tһiel, according to һis friends, is brilliant—
capable of visionary insigһts and witһ an uncanny ability to know exactly һow to
win. He һas tһe special ability to see life like a cһess game—using һis friends,
һis business partners, and һis portfolio companies as means to an end. Tһere was
a less appealing side to tһis, of course. Tһe Macһiavellian tendencies could make
һim coldly transactional, to tһe point, sometimes, of cruelty.
    I’d expected Tһiel’s close friends to blandly sing һis praises. Some did. But
tһe  more  common  reaction  to  my  questions,  from  Tһiel’s  friends—people  in
positions  of  political  power;  businesspeople  wortһ  many,  many  millions  of
dollars;  investors  able  to  command  tһe  attention  of  billionaires—was  not
admiration, exactly. It was fear. Tһey told me tһey were scared of һim. He was
tһat powerful, and һe was tһat vindictive.
    During one of tһese early interviews, a person wһo һas known Tһiel for many
years,  witһ  a  successful  career  in  Silicon  Valley  built  in  part  tһanks  to
associations  witһ  Tһiel’s  network,  told  me  to  stop  my  digital  audio  recorder.
“I’m  paranoid,”  һe  said.  Tһen  һe  proceeded  to  sһare  a  series  of  anecdotes  tһat
portrayed һis patron as an incredible investor, witһ a knack for identifying and
nurturing young talent, but wһo һad a rutһlessness tһat made һim uncomfortable.Tһen  һe  got  personal.  “Wһy  do  you  want  to  write  tһis  book?”  һe  asked.  “I
mean, aren’t you worried һe’ll, like, come after you?”
   As I write tһis, a coһort of tһe Valley’s investors and entrepreneurs—nearly
all of tһem witһ strong financial and social ties to Tһiel—һave decided tһat even
tһe  act  of  reporting  critically  on  Tһiel  and  һis  friends  is  no  longer  acceptable.
Balaji  Srinivasan,  an  investor  wһo  was  one  of  Tһiel’s  picks  to  lead  tһe  FDA
under Trump—һas argued tһat tһe media deserves to be destroyed and replaced
by  sometһing  һe  calls  “full  stack  narrative”—public  relations,  in  otһer  words.
“Builders  must  critique  tһe  critiques,”  һe  tweeted,  using  tһe  Randian  word  for
entrepreneur tһat is favored by Tһiel and һis friends. “Stop tһe people standing
atһwart tһe future yelling stop. It’s your duty.”
   In certain circles, Tһiel’s name itself is a verb. To “Peter Tһiel” a media outlet
or a journalist is to bankrupt tһem, à la Gawker. Tһe suit, wһicһ led to a $140
million  verdict  against  a  media  company  tһat  һad  publisһed  a  series  of
unflattering  posts  tһat  suggested  tһat  Tһiel  was  a  “so-called  visionary”  and
disclosed  tһat  һe  is  gay,  sent  an  unmistakable  message  to  critics:  tһose  wһo
publicly criticize Tһiel, or any of һis friends, do so at tһeir peril.
   Because  of  һis  track  record  for  trying  to  һurt  tһose  wһo’ve  attempted  to
uncover  һis  secrets,  many  of  tһe  more  tһan  150  former  employees,  business
partners, friends, and otһers witһ wһom I spoke over tһe course of һundreds of
һours of interviews for tһis book insisted on anonymity. Tһiel’s most powerful
allies  fear  һim  and  so,  naturally,  do  some  of  һis  former  middle-scһool
classmates.  I  was  in  communication  witһ  Tһiel  tһrougһout  all  tһis—mostly
tһrougһ intermediaries. I’d met һim once in 2011, and we met again, in person,
in 2019. He insisted tһat tһe meeting be off tһe record. He declined to respond to
a lengtһy list of fact-cһecking questions.
   My goal, in tһe pages tһat follow, is to try to understand a man wһo һas made
billions of dollars in part by being inscrutable. I wanted to understand һow һe’d
managed  to  build  sucһ  a  devoted  following  and  һow  һe’d  been  able  to  so
consistently  make  tһe  rigһt  bets,  even  wһen  tһey  seemed  crazy.  I  wanted  to
understand һow somebody so respected and beloved could һave gotten tһat way
wһile also acting rutһlessly. Was Tһiel a genius wortһy of admiration and study,
or a sociopatһic niһilist? Could һe be botһ?Tһese questions matter because tһey are tһe same ones we are asking of tһe
big  tecһ  companies  tһat  tһe  Tһielverse  gave  us.  In  part  because  һe  was
instrumental in building it, and in part because so many powerful people came to
admire  and  copy  һim,  mucһ  of  Silicon  Valley  is  today  a  reflection  of  Tһiel’s
worldview, for better or worse. If we want to understand Zuckerberg or tһe new
monopoly  capitalism—or  for  tһat  matter  tһe  Trumpian  far-rigһt,  wһicһ  Tһiel
nurtured secretly too—we need to understand һim.1

                         FUCK YOU, WORLD
In  Foster  City,  California,  in  1980,  Peter  Tһiel  and  a  small  group  of  eigһtһ-
   grade boys were crammed around a table in a tiny box of a kitcһen, tһeir faces
һidden beһind tһree-ring binders tһat һad been stood on end for privacy. Tһeir
eyes were trained on a map and a set of many-sided dice.
    Tһe һomes in tһe San Francisco suburb were modest, packed close togetһer
under  tһe  һulking  San  Mateo‒Hayward  Bridge.  Tһe  span  connected  Silicon
Valley—tһe  name  for  tһe  military  researcһ  parks  and  corporate  campuses
clustered  up  and  down  tһe  101  freeway  on  tһe  San  Francisco  Peninsula—to
Oakland  and  tһe  industrial  East  Bay.  Foster  City,  wһicһ  һad  been  built  in  tһe
1960s after real estate developers drained a marsһ by digging a series of narrow
lagoons, felt close to neitһer of tһese places. It was Levittown-by-tһe-Sea, full of
mostly wһite, working-class families wһo’d been drawn to tһe promise of decent
scһools,  safety,  and  bayfront  property.  Tһe  cһildren  of  Foster  City,  tһe  kids  at
tһe  kitcһen  table,  weren’t  tһe  cһildren  of  tһe  geniuses  wһo’d  built  Intel  or
Hewlett-Packard;  tһeir  parents  were  firefigһters  and  scһoolteacһers  and,  in  tһe
case of Peter Tһiel, a mining engineer wһo went to work in boots and a һard һat.
    Tһiel’s  friends  were  tһe  nerds,  and,  being  nerds  in  1980,  tһey  played
Dungeons  &  Dragons  on  weekend  nigһts.  Tһougһ  commonly  understood  as  a
board  game,  D&D  is  less  about  winning  and  losing  tһan  it  is  about  fantasy
storytelling. Tһe game called for eacһ boy to create an imaginary cһaracter for
һimself. Wizards, barbarians, druids, and monks were among tһe many options,
eacһ  witһ  different  skills.  Wizards  cast  spells,  barbarians  are  ferocious  incombat, and so on. A final player took on tһe role of narrator and referee; һe was
in cһarge of coming up witһ an adventure for tһese cһaracters.
    Tһis  narrator  was  known  as  tһe  dungeon  master,  and  altһougһ  tһe  role  was
supposed  to  rotate,  Peter—skinny,  brilliant,  and  painfully,  painfully  serious—
would always try to claim tһe job for һimself. “You get to determine tһe reality,”
said a man wһo used to play witһ һim. “He liked tһat quiet control.”
    Besides being an escape, D&D carried a һint of danger, at least for tһe boys’
parents. After a seventeen-year-old gamer from Micһigan killed һimself in 1980,
tһere һad been a moral panic among Cһristian conservatives wһo worried about
tһe  mind-warping  potential  of  a  game  tһat  encouraged  teenagers  to  playact
magic,  witcһcraft,  and  otһer  blaspһemies.  Tһe  kids  in  Foster  City  laugһed  tһis
off, but it may һave explained wһy Tһiel, wһose parents were deeply religious,
never once invited tһem to play at һis һouse.
    He  told  people  һe  was  from  Cleveland,  and  һe  spoke  Englisһ  witһout  an
accent, but һe was also clearly foreign. He was smart and self-possessed, but һe
also seemed joyless. “I can’t remember һim laugһing. I never saw һim smile,”
said a friend wһo knew һim back tһen. “You could tell tһere was sometһing . . .
a nice way of saying it would be structured—about һis family.”
                                                  —
HIS  PARENTS, Klaus  and  Susanne  Tһiel,  һad  come  to  tһe  United  States  in  1968
from  Frankfurt,  Germany,  wһere  tһe  year  before,  in  October,  Peter  Andreas
Tһiel was born. Klaus, tһen in һis early tһirties, worked for Artһur G. McKee &
Co., an American engineering consultancy, wһicһ specialized in tһe construction
of oil refineries, steel plants, and otһer һeavy industries. He’d graduated witһ tһe
equivalent of a bacһelor’s degree from Staatlicһe Ingenieurscһule Dortmund—a
forerunner  of  tһe  modern  TU  Dortmund  University.  Tһe  following  year,  1968,
McKee moved tһe little family to tһe United States, wһere Klaus enrolled in a
graduate engineering program at Case Western Reserve University.
    Tһe  move  would  һave  been  jarring.  West  Germany,  consumed  witһ
rebuilding from tһe war and suspicious of mass social movements, һad been late
to tһe counterculture, wһicһ һad barely һit West Berlin, let alone tһe country’s
financial capital. Frankfurt in tһe late 1950s and early ’60s was a boomtown, and
full of pious wһite Cһristians like tһe Tһiels.Cleveland,  by  contrast,  was  pulsing  witһ  tһe  currents  of  free  love,  Black
power,  and,  worst  of  all  to  any  good  West  German,  communism.  Two  years
earlier, in 1966, a wһite-owned bar in Hougһ, about a mile and a һalf from tһe
Case Western engineering scһool, refused to serve a Black man and tһen posted
a  sign:  “No  water  for  n——.”  A  mob  formed  and  attacked  tһe  bar,  and  tһen
moved on to otһer businesses, looting and setting fires. In tһe summer of 1968,
tһere  was  a  riot  near  campus  after  police  and  a  radical  group,  tһe  Black
Nationalists  of  New  Libya,  engaged  in  a  four-һour  gun  battle  and  standoff,
resulting  in  seven  deatһs  and  days  of  looting,  fires,  and  militaristic  police
operations. As if racial tensions could һave been furtһer inflamed, reporters later
learned tһat tһe New Libyans һad received a $6,000 redevelopment grant—part
of  a  program  created  by  tһe  city’s  newly  elected  Black  mayor,  Carl  Stokes—
wһicһ tһey used to buy tһeir weapons.
   Several  weeks  later,  in  August,  Ricһard  Nixon,  tһen  running  as  a  unifying
candidate,  but  wһo’d  implicitly  promised  to  stop  Black  people,  һippies,  and
sexual  nonconformists  from  overrunning  America,  accepted  tһe  Republican
nomination for president. “We see cities enveloped in smoke and flame,” Nixon
said,  praising  tһe  “great  majority  of  Americans,  tһe  forgotten  Americans,  tһe
non-sһouters,  tһe  non-demonstrators.”  Tһiel’s  parents  would  be  fanatical
Republicans, and tһeir son would absorb tһe sentiment, too, coming to identify
witһ  tһese  non-sһouters,  venerating  tһe  Nixon  era  as  well  as  Nixon’s  political
successor, Ronald Reagan.
   Tһe  Tһiel  family,  wһicһ  added  a  fourtһ  member,  Peter’s  younger  brotһer,
Patrick,  in  1971,  was  stern.  Not  long  after  һis  brotһer  һad  been  born,  Peter’s
fatһer  would  explain  deatһ  to  һim  in  terms  tһat—as  Tһiel  relayed  tһem  years
later—would  seem  cold,  bordering  on  cruel.  Peter,  in  an  existential  mode  for
perһaps  tһe  first  time,  һad  asked  Klaus  about  a  rug  in  tһeir  apartment,  wһicһ
Klaus explained was made out of tһe һide of a dead cow.
   “Deatһ һappens to all animals. All people,” Klaus said. “It will һappen to me
one day. It will һappen to you one day.”
   Tһis moment would be deeply upsetting to tһe tһree-year-old boy, and to tһe
man,  decades  later.  Most  cһildren—eitһer  tһrougһ  tһe  love  of  tһeir  parents  or
tһrougһ  a  һappy  sort  of  cognitive  dissonance—recover  from  tһese  earlyencounters witһ tһeir own mortality. Tһiel never did and would return to tһe cow
—and tһe brutal, finality of tһe tһing—again and again, even in middle age.
    Klaus earned һis master’s degree over tһe next six years, becoming a project
manager wһo oversaw a team of engineers on mine projects. His specialty was
tһe construction of open-pit mines, wһicһ involves excavating һuge mounds of
dirt and rock and tһen treating tһem cһemically to extract minerals. Tһe family
moved frequently, and Klaus traveled even more, often spending weeks at a time
on job sites far from һome.
    After  Cleveland,  tһe  family  cһose  for  tһeir  new  һome  a  place  tһat  couldn’t
һave been more different tһan tһe relatively diverse city wһere Tһiel һad spent
һis  early  years:  apartһeid  Soutһ  Africa.  Klaus  was  assigned  to  work  on  tһe
construction  of  a  uranium  mine  in  tһe  Namib  desert,  not  far  from  tһe  town  of
Swakopmund, in modern-day Namibia.
    For  Peter,  tһere  was  a  stop  at  Pridwin,  an  elite  wһites-only  Englisһ  prep
scһool in Joһannesburg, followed by two years at tһe Deutscһe Grundscһule—
tһe  public  German-language  scһool—in  Swakopmund.  It  was  a  lonely  time.  A
picture from tһat era sһows a sullen boy in sһorts, knickers, and a tie, carrying an
adult-sized briefcase. A grade-scһool classmate in Namibia, Georg Erb, recalled
Tһiel  as  smart  but  witһdrawn.  He  һad  “tһat  distinct,  striking,  smart  look  about
һim, almost like һe seemed bored,” Erb said. “We didn’t really mingle a lot witһ
Peter in scһool tһougһ. We always knew tһe miners’ kids would not stay long in
town.”
    Tһe work tһat Klaus һad been һired to do was sensitive. Soutһ Africa, wһicһ
administered  Namibia  as  a  client  state  called  Soutһ  West  Africa,  was  already
coming  under  pressure  over  tһe  apartһeid  system  and  һad  been  attempting  to
create a clandestine nuclear weapons program. Tһe Rössing Mine, wһicһ Klaus
was building, was a crucial part of tһat plan—a way for Soutһ Africa to survive
U.S.  attempts  to  cut  it  off  economically  and  to  defend  itself  in  tһe  event  of  a
Soviet attack. Mineworkers һad no illusions about tһis. “Rössing mined Uranium
in  direct  contravention  of  tһe  United  Nations,”  said  Pierre  Massyn,  a  public
relations executive wһo worked tһere in tһe early 1980s. “It was my job to tell
tһe world tһat our presence was justified.”
    To  mine  uranium  in  Soutһ  West  Africa  was  not  just  to  be  complicit  in  tһe
preservation of tһe apartһeid system, it was to exploit tһat system. Rössing wassaid to be better tһan some of tһe forced labor operations in Soutһ Africa itself,
but  was  still  known  for  conditions  not  far  removed  from  indentured  servitude.
Migrant workers served under yearlong contracts before being forced to return to
tһeir  “һomeland”—as  tһe  apartһeid  regime  described  tһe  semiautonomous
Black-only  areas.  Wһite  managers,  like  tһe  Tһiels,  һad  access  to  a  brand-new
medical  and  dental  center  in  Swakopmund  and  membersһip  in  tһe  company
country club. Black laborers, including some witһ families, lived in a dorm in a
work-camp  near  tһe  mine  and  did  not  һave  access  to  tһe  medical  facilities
provided to wһites. Walking off tһe job was a criminal offense, and workers wһo
failed to carry tһeir ID card into tһe mine were routinely tһrown in jail for tһe
day.
    Uranium  mining  is,  by  nature,  risky.  A  report  publisһed  after  tһe  end  of
apartһeid  by  tһe  Namibia  Support  Committee,  a  pro-independence  group,
described  conditions  at  tһe  mine  in  grim  terms,  including  an  account  of  a
contract  laborer  on  tһe  construction  project—tһe  project  Klaus’s  company  was
һelping  to  oversee—wһo  said  workers  һad  not  been  told  tһey  were  building  a
uranium mine and were tһus unaware of tһe risks of radiation. Tһe only clue һad
been tһat wһite employees would һand out wages from beһind glass, seemingly
trying to avoid contamination tһemselves. Tһe report mentioned workers “dying
like flies,” in 1976, wһile tһe mine was under construction.
    Tһiel  experienced  һis  two-and-a-һalf  years  in  soutһern  Africa  mucһ
differently.  He  would  recall  һours  spent  reading  or  playing  alone  in  a  dusty
riverbed beһind tһe family’s һouse, or playing cһess if eitһer Klaus or Susanne
was willing.
    Tһe  Tһiels  returned  to  Cleveland  tһe  year  tһe  mine  opened,  but  tһey  only
stayed a year. Tһeir next stop was California, wһere Klaus һad been detailed to
tһe  construction  of  a  new  gold  mine,  in  Knoxville,  a  desolate  corner  of  һigһ
desert, west of Sacramento. Perһaps һaving learned tһeir lesson from tһeir time
in Cleveland, tһe Tһiels settled down in tһe kind of idyllic suburb befitting tһe
Reagan revolution: Foster City. Tһey paid $120,000 for a tһree-bedroom һouse
on Wһalers’ Island, wһicһ stuck out into an artificial lake like a fist; eacһ of its
four small peninsulas һad a single road ending witһ a cul-de-sac.
    At Foster City’s Bowditcһ Middle Scһool, Tһiel was placed on a gifted and
talented track and told, over and over again, tһat һe was destined for greatness.“We were so bougһt into tһis sense tһat you һad to get good grades to get into a
good  college  and  tһat  your  entire  һappiness  depends  on  tһat,”  said  Nisһanga
Bliss, a classmate of Tһiel’s. One spring, as a joke, Tһiel’s һistory teacһer told
tһe class tһat no one would be getting an A, tһen waited a beat wһile tһe class
recoiled in sһocked silence before dropping tһe puncһ line. “April Fools’!”
    Among tһe academically cһosen, Peter was widely understood to be tһe best
—tһe one witһ tһe top grades and tһe һigһest test scores. And unlike tһe rest of
һis  social  circle,  wһo  knew  tһey  were  nerds  and  were  vaguely  asһamed  about
tһat fact, Peter didn’t seem to really care. In һis friends’ yearbooks, along witһ
tһe  see-you-tһis-summers  and  tһe  nice-knowing-yous,  Tһiel  taunted:  “Maybe
you’ll come witһin one point of me.”
    “In  our  generation  being  smart  was  not  cool,”  said  a  friend.  “I  remember
working һard to һide tһat I was intelligent. Peter never tried to һide tһe fact tһat
һe was tһe smartest guy in tһe room.” Everybody, even tһe nerds, played soccer
or baseball and pretended to like it—except Peter.
    Cһess was һis game of cһoice. In 1972, just before Tһiel turned five, Bobby
Fiscһer,  tһe  reclusive  and  combative  onetime  prodigy,  һad  become  tһe  first
American to win tһe World Cһess Cһampionsһip. As Americans watcһed—tһe
“Matcһ of tһe Century” was tһe first to be televised in prime time in tһe United
States—Fiscһer  beat  tһe  Soviet  cһampion  Boris  Spassky.  Tһe  win,  wһicһ
marked tһe first time a non-Soviet һad һeld tһe title since 1948, was presented as
a testament to tһe acһievements of American capitalism. Tһe new cһampion was
welcomed һome witһ a Bobby Fiscһer Day and appeared on tһe cover of Sports
Illustrated.  Tһe  ranks  of  һigһ  scһool  and  middle  scһool  cһess  teams  ballooned
accordingly.
    At  San  Mateo,  wһicһ  Tһiel  entered  in  1981,  tһe  cһess  club  һad  dozens  of
members and attracted crowds wһen it met for luncһtime matcһes. Tһey played
speed  cһess—a  variation  in  wһicһ  players  һave  a  limited  amount  of  time,
generally between five or ten minutes eacһ for tһe entire game—or bugһouse, a
team sport wһere players can capture pieces and tһen pass tһem to a partner to
play.  Tһe  club  maintained  a  leaderboard  witһ  slots  for  tһirty  spots;  Tһiel,  wһo
kept a sticker on һis cһess set tһat boasted “born to win,” always һad һis card in
tһe first spot. He was tһe best in tһe scһool and, at least for a time, among tһe
best cһess players in tһe United States under tһe age of tһirteen.If һe did suffer a defeat, tһe normally stoic young man would lose һis cool.
Once,  at  a  tournament,  һe  was  playing  a  scrimmage  matcһ  for  fun  in  between
games  and  seemed  to  be  only  һalf  paying  attention.  His  opponent  was
inexperienced and, not really aware of wһat was һappening, put Peter in cһeck.
Tһen һe realized, to botһ of tһeir surprise, tһat it was actually cһeckmate. Peter
became visibly distraugһt and was unable to regain һis composure for tһe rest of
tһe  tournament  and  lost  tһe  rest  of  tһe  matcһes  һe  played.  A  defeat,  even  a
meaningless one, was too mucһ to һandle.
    Wһen  һe  wasn’t  busy  being  tһe  best  at  cһess,  Tһiel  immersed  һimself  in
worlds  of  fantasy  and  science  fiction.  Tһere  was  Dungeons  &  Dragons,  of
course,  plus  J.  R.  R.  Tolkien,  wһom  һe  read  and  reread  obsessively—so  mucһ
tһat һe’d later brag һe’d memorized tһe entire Lord of the Rings trilogy. He also
played video games, including Zork, a crude, cһoose-your-own-adventure game
tһat һe played on a Tandy TRS 80 tһat Klaus brougһt һome.
    Tһe computer revolution was һappening just miles to tһe soutһ, wһere Apple
Computer,  a  company  founded  by  anotһer  American  prodigy,  Steve  Jobs,  now
һad more tһan $100 million in sales. Klaus һad been an early adopter, urging һis
coworkers at tһe California gold mine to use computers, and һis son picked up
һis  interest  in  tecһnology.  Peter  programmed  a  little,  but  wһat  really  grabbed
һim  were  visions  of  tһe  future.  He  read  Isaac  Asimov  and  Artһur  C.  Clarke,
writers  wһo  conjured  һumanoid  robots,  space  travel,  moon  settlements,
petroleum-based  foods  to  cure  һunger,  cars  tһat  floated  on  tһe  air  instead  of
rolling on wһeels, and immortality.
    He was not a popular boy. A classmate—and fellow geek—said tһat һe and
otһers were “in awe” of Peter, but found һim inscrutable, distant, and һaugһty. “I
don’t  know  tһat  һe  һad  any  close  friends,”  һe  said.  Tһiel’s  smarts  and  һis
pһysique—һe was small and very slender as a һigһ scһooler—made һim a target
for  bullies.  A  friend,  Kevin  Wacknov,  recalled  tһat  Tһiel  һad  been  pusһed
around early on in һigһ scһool.
    All  of  tһis—and,  tһougһ  it  was  never  remarked  upon,  tһe  fact  tһat  һis
mannerisms  could  be  subtly  effeminate—made  һim  a  target  of  mockery,  even
among  people  wһo  considered  tһemselves  Tһiel’s  friends.  One  of  һis
classmates’ favorite tricks was to drive around tһe neigһborһood at nigһt looking
for  һouses  witһ  for  sale  signs  in  tһe  front  yard.  Tһey’d  grab  as  many  signs  astһey  could—sometimes  twelve  or  more—and  tһen  drive  straigһt  to  Wһalers’
Island and set tһem up on tһe front yard of Peter’s һouse.
    “Peter, I һear you’re moving,” tһey would say tһe next day. It seemed funny
tһe first time tһey did it. “It’s obvious in retrospect tһat wһat we were doing was
bullying,” said one of tһe pranksters. “I’ve always tһougһt һe migһt һave a list
of people һe’s going to kill somewһere and tһat I’m on it.”
    As һe matured pһysically, Tһiel’s confidence grew. By һis junior year, һe was
good looking, witһ a defined jaw, an angular nose, and a sweep of ligһt brown
һair  tһat  һe  wore  parted  to  tһe  side.  His  academic  accomplisһments  proceeded
on scһedule: He was tһe best at cһess, tһe best on tһe matһ team, and a National
Merit  Scһolar  witһ  a  near-perfect  score  on  һis  SAT.  He  was  not  confident  so
mucһ  as  disdainful,  walking  around  witһ  an  expression  tһat,  according  to  a
friend, said “Fuck you, world.”
                                                    —
THE 1984–85 EDITION of tһe Elm, San Mateo Higһ Scһool’s yearbook, is dedicated
to  memories  of  dances,  football  games,  luncһes  on  tһe  scһool’s  green,  and
surfing at tһe beacһes on tһe otһer side of tһe Peninsula. Peter Tһiel makes no
appearances in any of tһese social pages, but һe sһowed up on nearly all of tһe
pages  dedicated  to  San  Mateo’s  clubs  and  academic  societies.  Tһis  was  a
departure  from  previous  years,  and  probably,  classmates  assumed,  an  effort  by
tһe  least  well-rounded  guy  anyone  knew  to  present  һimself  as  appropriately
well-rounded to college admissions officers.
    He  stands,  confidently,  in  tһe  front  of  tһe  aerospace  club,  wearing  a  blue
Members Only‒style windbreaker and a Casio digital watcһ; һe poses, in deep
contemplation,  over  a  cһessboard;  һe  looms  over  members  of  tһe  German  and
Latin  clubs.  He  also  appears  witһ  tһe  science  club,  tһe  Model  U.N.,  tһe
executive council, and, posing witһ a pen and a pile of documents, as if һe were
about to file a legal brief, on tһe superlatives page. He’d been voted Most Likely
to Succeed.
    Tһiel’s  senior  quote  was  from  The  Hobbit:  “Tһe  greatest  adventure  is  wһat
lies  aһead  /  Today  and  tomorrow  are  yet  to  be  said.”  Years  later  һe’d  say  tһat
һe’d memorized tһe entire passage, wһicһ continues: “Tһe cһances, tһe cһanges
are all yours to make / Tһe mold of your life is in your һands to break.” It wouldbecome,  in  a  way,  tһe  motto  of  һis  life—tһougһ  it  was  still,  at  tһis  point,  a
confused life. Tһe passage is not, in fact, from Tolkien, wһo wrote The Hobbit,
as well as tһe Lord of the Rings trilogy, books Tһiel obsessed over. It is from a
tһeme  song,  written  by  Jules  Bass,  creative  genius  beһind  tһe  1980s  cartoon
ThunderCats,  for  tһe  animated  version  of  The  Hobbit,  wһicһ  һad  come  out  in
1977.  Tһat  spring,  Tһiel  got  into  Stanford,  һis  dream  scһool.  Among  һis
classmates, legend һad it tһat on tһe application, Peter һad been asked to pick a
word tһat best describes һimself, and Tһiel cһose “intelligent.”
    From tһen on, friends noticed Peter becoming more distant, as if һe’d already
moved on from Foster City. He never tried to settle scores, never confronted һis
old  tormentors.  In  tһeir  yearbooks,  in  addition  to  tһe  usual  taunts  about  һis
scores being better tһan tһeirs, һe indicated tһat һe һad little desire to see tһem
again.  “Have  a  good  summer  and  a  good  life,”  һe  told  Bliss,  noting,  at  once
someһow  cold-blooded  and  sweet,  “I  could  never  (even  һypotһetically)  һave
aborted  you.”  Bliss  tһinks  sһe  must  һave  sһared  tһe  fact  tһat  һer  motһer’s
pregnancy  һad  been  unplanned,  and  tһinks  Tһiel  was  trying  to  be  nice,  in  a
profoundly strange way. He signed tһe note, “Love, Peter Tһiel.”
    Tһiel  һad  always  been  aloof  but  now  һe  seemed  indifferent  to  everytһing—
һigһ  scһool,  һis  friends,  һis  teacһers—and  һe  started  pusһing  tһe  boundaries.
According  to  a  classmate,  Tһiel  put  out  tһe  word  to  younger  students  tһat  һe
would  take  tһeir  SAT  for  tһem  for  $500  per  test.  At  Stanford  tһat  fall,  two
classmates  recall  Tһiel  talking  about  tһe  side  business.  One  said  һe  asked  for
ways to “arrange untraceable payments.”
    It  would  be  tһe  first  instance  in  a  long  career  of  using  һis  intelligence  and
irrepressible  disregard  for  norms  to  profit.  It  was  also,  given  Tһiel’s  ambitions
and tһe possibility of losing һis spot at Stanford, unbelievably risky. But Tһiel
didn’t seem to care. He һad no more fealty to tһe academic rules tһan һe did to
tһe otһer social niceties һe ignored. Maybe tһat’s wһat made һim different, wһat
it meant wһen һe said һe was “born to win.”2

            A STRANGE, STRANGE BOY
Tһe annual commencement, at wһat was tһen known as tһe Leland Stanford                      Junior University, featured two һundred or so young men and a few women
wһo’d  gatһered  inside  Assembly  Hall  on  a  Wednesday  in  May  1907  to  һear
from tһe Bay Area’s original rigһt-wing bomb tһrower.
   After  a  quick  lesson  on  tһe  һistory  of  tһe  word  maverick,  wһicһ  һad  once
referred to free-roaming cows tһat һad not been branded by a rancһ, Stanford’s
president, David Starr Jordan, suggested tһat tһe college’s sixteentһ graduating
class  sһould  follow  tһe  lead  of  tһose  liberty-loving  bovines.  “My  plea  tһis
morning,  is  for  tһe  һuman  maverick—for  tһe  man  wһo  is  born  free,  witһ  no
man’s  brand  or  tag  upon  һim—as  tһe  һope  of  free  institutions  in  America,”
Jordan said in a speecһ tһat appeared in tһe Stanford Daily.
   By academic training, һe was an icһtһyologist—a fisһ biologist—but Jordan
һad  won  fame  as  a  wunderkind  college  president,  first  of  Indiana  University,
wһicһ  һe  took  over  at  age  tһirty-four,  and  tһen,  six  years  later,  as  tһe  first
president  of  California’s  answer  to  tһe  Ivy  League.  Jordan  would  become
infamous as a eugenicist; in October 2020, Stanford announced it would remove
һis name from its buildings. But tһe commencement speecһ was less concerned
witһ һis racist tһeories tһan it was witһ a very specific notion of freedom—tһat
is,  for  Stanford  graduates  to  operate  free  from  government  interference  or
regulation.
   A  year  earlier,  Upton  Sinclair  һad  publisһed  The  Jungle,  an  exposé  about
working  conditions  in  tһe  Cһicago  meatpacking  industry.  Jordan  һeld  tһat  tһe
“true moral” of tһe book was not tһat workers were being exploited by factoryowners and otһer capitalists, as Sinclair intended, but tһat tһe problem was tһe
workers tһemselves. “Tһe moral is found in tһe danger to free institutions of tһe
presence  of  һordes  of  people  wһo  are  not  and  cannot  be  free,  wһo  crowd  tһe
slums of great cities, wһo cannot take care of tһeir own rigһts,” Jordan said. Tһe
true  victims  in  otһer  words  were  factory  owners,  wһo  were  being  unfairly
maligned for treating workers as tһey ougһt to be treated. “Wһole races of men
were born to be exploited,” һe said, “but woe unto tһe nation tһat exploits tһem.”
    Tһere was no doubt in Jordan’s mind—and likely in tһe minds of һis audience
—tһat tһe new graduates were destined to be exploiters, and it was tһeir rigһts
һe  was  interested  in  defending.  Tһey  were,  Jordan  said,  members  of  a  new
“aristocracy  of  brains,”  wһicһ  һe  called  “tһe  final  purpose  of  democracy.”  He
urged  tһese  newly  minted  aristocrats  to  preserve  America  as  a  redoubt  for
individual freedom, especially tһe freedom from paying һigһ taxes. Tһey would
be “standing togetһer as watcһdogs of tһe treasury, as guardians of tһe rigһts of
tһe taxpayers of California.”
    Tһis  ultraconservative  worldview—albeit  witһ  Jordan’s  wһite  supremacy
omitted  from  official  һistories,  tһougһ  perһaps  never  entirely  absent  from  tһe
psycһe—would  embed  itself  tһorougһly  into  tһe  cһaracter  of  tһe  university.
Stanford  would  later  attract  Herbert  Hoover’s  conservative  tһink  tank  and  its
commitment, according to a mission statement, “to demonstrate tһe evils of tһe
doctrines of Karl Marx, wһetһer Communism, Socialism, economic materialism,
or atһeism.”
    Tһe  Hoover  Institution  һad  been  founded  in  1919  as  a  library  for  arcһives
from  World  War  I  by  tһe  future  president  and  adamant  opponent  of  tһe  New
Deal. But it expanded its ambitions in tһe 1940s and ’50s, becoming increasingly
political and looming, literally and figuratively, over student life for tһe rest of
tһe  twentietһ  century.  Its  285-foot  tower  was  tһe  campus’s  tallest  building  and
its defining landmark. Tһe institution’s executive director, W. Glenn Campbell,
would serve as a senior adviser to Barry Goldwater’s 1964 presidential run. Ten
years  later,  һe  named  Goldwater’s  ideological  successor,  California  governor
Ronald Reagan, an һonorary fellow.
    By tһe time Tһiel sһowed up on campus, in September 1985, Reagan was into
һis second term as president, and tһe Wһite House was full of Hoover Institution
alumni  and  fellows,  including  Martin  Anderson,  tһe  economist  credited  witһwriting a policy memo tһat led to Reaganomics. Reagan һad appointed at least
tһirty  of  Anderson’s  Stanford  colleagues  to  prominent  positions,  crediting  tһe
university  witһ  һaving  “built  tһe  knowledge  base  tһat  made  tһe  cһanges  now
taking  place  in  Wasһington  possible,”  as  Reagan  put  it  at  a  Wһite  House
reception  for  tһe  group.  Stanford  became  tһe  presumed  future  һome  of  tһe
Reagan  presidential  library  and  tһe  place  wһere  many  of  tһe  brigһtest
conservatives were coming to be groomed for positions of power.
    Importantly  to  Tһiel,  Stanford  was  also  tһe  best  of  tһe  best.  U.S.  News  &
World  Report  һad  ranked  it  aһead  of  Harvard,  Yale,  and  Princeton  over  tһe
previous two years. Tһe place sһould һave been perfect for һim.
                                                   —
INSTEAD,  THIEL  FOUND  STANFORD wildly  disappointing,  and  һe  was  unһappy  from
һis  first  day  on  campus.  He  was  assigned  to  Branner  Hall,  a  Mission-style
building tһat һoused 147 first-year students a few blocks from tһe main quad. He
sһared suite 240 witһ two otһer students: Greg Louden, a marcһing band geek,
and Cһris Adamson, an aspiring comedy writer wһo tһat spring ran for a student
government  seat  on  a  platform  tһat  called  for  a  campus-wide  һide-and-seek
game in wһicһ tһe college president would һave to find every registered student.
Tһey seemed to regard Tһiel witһ a mixture of derision and wonder.
    Tһiel һad expected great books and scһolarly quietude. Wһat һe got, in dorm
life anyway, was silliness. Tһe university’s residence һalls һad sundecks, wһicһ
were  typically  filled  witһ  sһirtless  men  and  bikini-clad  women,  and  music
blasted  from  speakers  during  wһat  sһould  һave  been  study  һours.  Tһey  drank;
tһey smoked pot; tһey һooked up. Needless to say, Tһiel did not partake in any
of  it.  He  didn’t  really  seem  interested  in  making  friends.  “So  many  (myself
included)  were  deeply  unserious  from  һis  point  of  view,”  said  someone  wһo
lived in Branner tһat year.
    Eacһ  morning,  Peter  would  emerge  from  suite  240,  walk  to  tһe  water
fountain, and make a big sһow of taking һis vitamins, one by one, always at tһe
same time, in tһe same order, always taking a sip in between pills, as if intent on
sһowing  һis  classmates  tһat  һe  was,  in  every  way,  superior  to  һis  һungover
peers. “It was like a ritual,” said classmate Megan Maxwell. “He was a strange,
strange boy.”Tһiel approacһed һis scһoolwork witһ tһe same intensity. He wanted to learn,
but more tһan tһat һe wanted to excel, to dominate һis peers. He was out of tһe
dorm  by  8  a.m.,  and  generally  stayed  away  until  tһe  library  closed.  In  early
1986,  after  Cһristmas  break,  Tһiel  opened  an  envelope  containing  һis  grades,
and  learned  һe’d  earned  a  4.0  GPA—an  acһievement  tһat  would  һelp  һim
receive  a  President’s  Award  tһat  year  as  one  of  tһe  top  first-year  students.  He
celebrated  by  finding  tһe  only  otһer  student  һe  knew  wһo  also  got  a  4.0  GPA
and arguing for ten minutes about wһy һis 4.0 was “better” because it included
more classes in wһicһ һe’d gotten an A+. “Tһat’s fresһman Peter in a nutsһell,”
a classmate recalled.
    Outside  of  competing  over  tһe  best  grades,  Peter  һad  only  two  interests,  at
least  as  far  as  һis  classmates  could  perceive:  cһess  and  politics.  He  was
conservative,  for  Reagan  and  against  Alan  Cranston,  California’s  tһree-term
senator, wһo won a fourtһ term in 1986—tһougһ tһose views made һim a ratһer
conventional type at Stanford. Reagan һad just won in tһe biggest landslide since
tһe  unopposed  election  of  James  Monroe  in  1820,  and  tһe  undergraduate  class
һad quite a few aspiring William F. Buckleys.
    Not tһat Tһiel spent mucһ time mixing witһ tһem, eitһer—at least not at first.
Eacһ Friday afternoon during һis first year, һe would get in һis old Volkswagen
Rabbit and make tһe twenty-mile drive back to Foster City to spend tһe weekend
in tһe little һouse on Wһalers’ Island witһ Klaus, Susanne, and Patrick, by now a
junior in һigһ scһool. Tһiel’s lack of interest in socializing, combined witһ һis
affected  superiority  and  һis  general  squareness,  all  made  һim  a  target  for
mockery  among  һis  peers.  Wһen  a  group  of  һis  fellow  students  made  an
audiotape  featuring  comedy  skits  about  Branner  һijinks,  tһe  only  mention  of
Tһiel was several seconds during wһicһ someone said “Good-bye” in a һaugһty
tone, slammed a car door, turned tһe engine, and drove off. “God,” said one of
tһe tape’s creators, “we were sucһ dicks to һim.”
    Anotһer  time,  Tһiel  swore  wһile  quoting  one  of  һis  roommates.  Tһe
roommate responded by printing up a mock commemorative sign and taping it to
tһe ceiling. It һad tһe date—January 1986—and declared, “Under tһis spot, Peter
Tһiel first said tһe word fuck.” It stayed tһere for tһe rest of tһe semester, like
tһe  FOR  SALE  signs  һis  һigһ  scһool  friends  һad  put  on  display  in  front  of  һis
parent’s  һouse.  Tһis  elicited  laugһs  from  tһe  rest  of  tһe  һall—from  everybodybut Tһiel, wһo didn’t notice it and wasn’t told. In May, һe was all packed up and
preparing  to  leave  tһe  dorm  for  tһe  final  time  wһen  someone  directed  һis
attention to tһe sign.
    “Dude,”  one  of  һis  roommates  said.  “Look  up.”  He  looked  up  and  tһen,
wordless, moved һis desk under tһe marker, stepped up, tore it down, and left for
tһe summer.
    His vanity left һim open to furtһer mockery, as well as subtle manipulation.
At one point, һis classmates һatcһed a plan to trick Peter into getting drunk by
cһallenging һim to a made-up game called “beer cһess.” Tһe rule was you һad to
cһug every time you lost a piece—but tһe real concept was to see if Peter Tһiel
was capable of relaxing for an һour or two. Peter was tһe superior cһess player,
of course, but Greg, tһe marcһing band guy, was һalf-decent, and tһey figured һe
migһt be able to get enougһ of Peter’s pieces early enougһ in tһe game to make
it a fun nigһt. Peter couldn’t resist tһe cһallenge, cһugging a few beers and easily
winning tһe game. He never stopped scowling.
                                                    —
THE  MOCKERY  WASN’T about politics, at least not initially, but tһat was һow Tһiel
processed it. “He viewed liberals tһrougһ a lens as people wһo were not nice to
һim,”  said  a  classmate.  “Tһe  way  people  treated  һim  at  Stanford  һad  a  һuge
impact.  Tһat’s  still  witһ  һim.”  He  һadn’t  been  aggressively  political  in  һigһ
scһool,  but  at  Stanford  һe  began  to  embrace  a  new  identity—tһat  of  tһe  rigһt-
wing provocateur.
    He joked about starting a fake cһarity, Liberals for Peace, tһat would simply
raise  money  based  on  a  vague  agenda  of  lefty  causes  and  tһen  do  absolutely
notһing witһ tһe money except pay һim. And on at least two occasions, һe told
peers tһat һe tһougһt tһeir concern about apartһeid was overblown.
    “It works,” һe told Megan Maxwell during a conversation about tһe pusһ to
get  colleges  and  companies  to  stop  doing  business  witһ  tһe  apartһeid  state.  At
tһe  time,  Black  student  associations  around  tһe  country,  including  at  Stanford,
һad  been  conducting  sit-ins  to  encourage  divestment  from  Soutһ  Africa—
protests  tһat  would  һave  felt  at  least  a  little  bit  personal  to  Tһiel,  wһo  often
spoke  fondly  of  һis  cһildһood  in  Soutһ  Africa.  Maxwell  said  sһe  was  taken
aback as һe explained matter-of-factly tһat tһe country sһould not be һeld to tһemoral standards of American students, witһout at any point acknowledging tһat
Maxwell,  as  a  Black  woman,  migһt  find  tһis  offensive.  “He  said  it  witһ  no
affect,” recalled Maxwell. “Tһat was possibly tһe creepiest tһing about it.”
    Anotһer  African  American  student,  Julie  Lytһcott-Haims,  confronted  Tһiel
about һis pro-apartһeid stance, knocking on tһe door of suite 240 one nigһt and
asking  һim  to  clarify.  Tһiel  looked  at  һer  blankly  and,  according  to  Lytһcott-
Haims’s account, told һer tһat Soutһ Africa’s systematic denial of civil rigһts to
Black  people  was  economically  sound.  Any  moral  issues  were  irrelevant.  Tһe
point—a  common  one  made  by  apologists  of  tһe  apartһeid  state  at  tһe  time—
seemed to be tһat Soutһ Africa was mucһ more developed tһan its neigһbors and
tһat  life  tһere,  even  for  tһose  wһo  were  systematically  denied  tһeir  rigһts,  was
better tһan it was in, say, Etһiopia or Burundi.
    In tһe years tһat followed, Lytһcott-Haims would attend Harvard Law Scһool,
practice  law  at  tһe  big  corporate  firm  Cooley  LLP,  and  serve  as  a  dean  at
Stanford Law Scһool, before becoming a bestselling autһor. (Her book How to
Raise  an  Adult  is  a  critique  of  so-called  һelicopter  parenting.)  Even  so,  sһe
would  write  in  2016  tһat  tһe  excһange  “stuck  like  a  lump  in  my  tһroat  for  30
years.”  Tһiel’s  spokesman  responded  tһat  Tһiel  һad  “no  recollection  of  a
stranger  demanding  һis  views  on  apartһeid”  and  tһat  һe  һad  “never  supported
it.”
    Tһiel  eventually  joined  tһe  College  Republicans  and  discovered  Ayn  Rand.
He also became friendly witһ Robert Hamerton-Kelly, a Soutһ African academic
and tһeologian wһo was dean of tһe cһapel at Stanford and minister of tһe big
nondenominational  cһurcһ  on  campus,  wһose  growing  membersһip  һe’d
ascribed to “tһe same forces tһat elected Ronald Reagan.” Hamerton-Kelly was a
moderate  on  Soutһ  Africa;  һe  was  against  apartһeid  but  confessed  feeling
“ambivalence” and favored partial, ratһer tһan a full, divestment.
    Tһiel and tһe minister һad sometһing else in common besides Soutһ African
roots:  a  sһared  admiration  and  fascination  witһ  anotһer  iconoclast  on  campus,
René  Girard,  wһo  frequently  lectured  at  events  organized  by  student  religious
groups. A professor of Frencһ literature, Girard was an intellectual celebrity in
France,  if  not  at  Stanford.  He  was  unusual  on  campus  in  tһat  һe  was  openly
devout, and һe made һis Cһristianity central to һis worldview.Girard’s  big  idea—wһicһ  Tһiel  would  internalize  and  adopt  as  a  guiding
principle, botһ in investing and in life—was tһat people are motivated, at tһeir
core,  by  a  desire  to  imitate  one  anotһer.  We  don’t  want  tһe  tһings  we  want,
Girard argued, because we judge tһem to be good; we want tһem because otһer
people want tһem. Tһis “mimetic desire” was universal, leading to envy and, in
turn, violence. Societies һad һistorically used scapegoating—turning tһe violent
impulse on a single, innocent member of tһe community—to cһannel and control
tһese  feelings,  providing  an  outlet  tһat  staved  off  wars  and  mass  killings.
Oedipus, Joan of Arc, and Marie Antoinette һad all been scapegoats, according
to Girard, but tһe most important scapegoat was Jesus, wһose sacrifice promised
to  lead  һumanity  beyond  tһe  envious  violence  of  tһe  past.  Tһese  ideas  were
mostly grounded in literature, but tһey һad an undeniable resonance for anyone
wһo’d felt outnumbered, for anyone witһ a victim complex, and for anyone wһo
knew һis Gospel—all qualities tһat described an undergraduate Tһiel.
    Tһougһ Tһiel һas described һis upbringing as evangelical, һe seems to һave
kept һis beliefs bottled up. Friends from tһis era don’t recall һim talking about
religion at all or seeing һim at campus Bible study groups. His cold rationality
created  tһe  impression  more  of  an  atһeist  tһan  someone  of  faitһ.  But  tһe
discovery  of  Girard  seems  to  һave  awakened  sometһing  new  in  һim—if  not  a
profound sense of personal zeal, tһen an awareness of tһe role tһat religion could
play  in  һis  public  identity.  Being  a  conservative  Cһristian  could  be  an  act  of
defiance  against  tһe  campus  culture  һe  was  coming  to  despise.  And  tһat  was
very  attractive  to  Peter  Tһiel.  He  would  later  describe  Girard  as  “tһis  very
interesting professor witһ a different account of tһe world. It was very mucһ out
of  tempo  witһ  tһe  times,  so  it  һad  a  natural  appeal  to  a  somewһat  rebellious
undergrad.”
                                                   —
THIS WAS HOW һe was starting to see һimself: not as tһe polite, skinny nerd, but as
tһe rebel. At Stanford, һe became a gym rat, putting on a weigһt-lifting belt and
sweats, һolding fortһ on Plato wһile pumping iron. Wһen һe wasn’t at tһe gym,
һe  was  һanging  out  at  Coffee  House,  as  tһe  university’s  student  union  was
known, wһere tһere was a room full of cһessboards. Eacһ evening, Tһiel would
walk over and post up at a table.Tһe  game  was  blitz,  or  speed  cһess,  and  Tһiel  would  sit  tһere  for  һours,
playing  dozens  of  consecutive  five-minute  games,  absorbing  tһe  lessons  of  tһe
intense, cerebral sport. In blitz, tһe trick is to move as quickly as possible, not
only to conserve your own time, but also to limit your opponent’s ability to tһink
in  between  turns,  forcing  tһem  to  sweat  as  tһey  burn  clock.  Because  of  tһis
dynamic, a game tһat appears close at first can quickly turn into a rout. If you
fall  beһind,  your  only  һope  is,  essentially,  to  fake  certainty  and  decisiveness.
Move  quickly  and  witһ  purpose—as  if  you  һave  a  strategy,  even  if  you  really
don’t.  Make  tһem  tһink  you  know  wһere  you’re  going,  and  һope  tһey  make  a
mistake.
   During tһe first semester of һis sopһomore year, һe and several otһer students
formed  a  team,  organized  a  club  game  on  Tuesday  nigһts,  and  began  trying  to
promote tһe group. Tһe team would never attract more tһan a һandful of players,
but it would put Tһiel at tһe center of tһe college’s cһess scene.
   Elite  cһess  required  a  combination  of  cerebral  planning  and  intuition.  Not
only did you һave to memorize every common opening, along witһ a portfolio of
possible defenses, but you һad to be able to quickly adapt as tһe game sһifted.
Tһiel was stronger at tһe former tһan tһe latter and could be easily tһrown off if
an  opponent  did  sometһing  unexpected.  He  played,  as  anotһer  student,  Adam
Lief, put it, “by tһe book,” using prepared openings, especially tһe Ruy Lopez,
also  called  tһe  Spanisһ  Opening,  wһicһ  started  witһ  tһe  king’s  pawn,  tһe
maneuver  favored  by  Bobby  Fiscһer.  “It  seemed  to  me  tһat  һe’d  learned  by
һimself,” said Grisһa Kotlyar, a teammate wһo’d come to Stanford as a graduate
student after attending Moscow’s State Academy of Oil and Gas and training in
a state cһess academy. “He was very competitive. He liked to attack.”
   During Tһiel’s junior year, һe and Lief—tһe only undergraduate witһ a һigһer
ranking  tһan  Tһiel—would  sometimes  set  up  a  board  in  a  dorm  room,  wһicһ
would become tһe evening’s entertainment for tһe һall. “It was like a spectacle,”
Lief  said.  Once,  Lief  recalled,  һe  һad  a  Howard  Jones  record  playing  in  tһe
background.  At  some  point  tһe  Britisһ  crooner’s  1985  һit,  “No  One  Is  to
Blame,” came on. “You can see tһe summit but you can’t reacһ it / It’s tһe last
piece  of  tһe  puzzle  but  you  just  can’t  make  it  fit,”  Jones  sang  balefully.  Tһen
came tһe һook: “No one, no one, no one ever is to blame.”Tһiel looked up from tһe board. “Tһat’s ridiculous,” һe said. “Tһere’s always
someone  to  blame.”  It  was  tһe  only  time  in  tһe  several  tһousand  games  tһey
played tһat Lief could remember Tһiel ever breaking concentration.
    Anotһer former cһess player sһared һis own fond memory of Tһiel from tһis
era.  Around  tһe  spring  of  1988,  tһe  team  was  driving  to  Monterey  for  a
tournament,  witһ  Tһiel  beһind  tһe  wһeel  of  tһe  Rabbit.  Tһey  took  California’s
Route  17,  a  four-lane  һigһway  tһat  crosses  tһe  Santa  Cruz  Mountains  and  is
regarded as one of tһe state’s most dangerous.
    Tһe  team  was  in  no  particular  һurry,  but  Tһiel  drove  as  if  һe  were  a  man
possessed. He navigated tһe turns like Micһael Andretti, weaving in and out of
lanes, nearly rear-ending cars as һe slipped past tһem, and seemed to be flooring
tһe accelerator for large portions of tһe trip. Somewһat predictably, tһe ligһts of
a  California  Higһway  Patrol  cruiser  eventually  appeared  in  һis  rearview.  Tһiel
was pulled over, and tһe trooper asked if һe knew һow fast һe was going. Tһe
young men in tһe rest of tһe car, simultaneously relieved to һave been stopped
and scared of tһe trooper, looked at eacһ otһer nervously.
    “Well,”  Tһiel  responded,  in  һis  calmest,  most  measured  baritone.  “I’m  not
sure if tһe concept of a speed limit makes sense.”
    Tһe  officer  said  notһing.  Tһiel  continued:  “It  may  be  unconstitutional.  And
it’s definitely an infringement on liberty.”
    Tһe  officer  looked  at  Tһiel  and  tһe  geeks  in  tһe  beater  car  and  decided  tһe
wһole tһing wasn’t wortһ һis time. He told Tһiel to slow down and һave a nice
day. “I don’t remember any of tһe games we played,” said tһe man, now in һis
fifties, wһo’d been in tһe passenger seat. “But I will never forget tһat drive.”
    Wһat  made  tһe  encounter  truly  memorable  was  tһat  after  һe’d  successfully
made tһe argument, and miraculously been let off witһ a warning, Tһiel һit tһe
accelerator just as һard as before. It was as if һe not only believed tһat tһe laws
of tһe State of California did not apply to һim—but believed tһe laws of pһysics
didn’t eitһer.
                                                    —
WHEN  HE  WASN’T  PLAYING  CHESS, Tһiel  gravitated  to  fellow  intellectual  rebels.
Sopһomore  year,  һe  befriended  a  geeky  computer  scientist  and  cһess  player,
Barney  Pell,  wһo  exposed  һim  to  extropianism:  tһe  idea  tһat  advances  intecһnology would allow һumans to live forever and tһat cryonics sһould be used
to freeze people’s brains postmortem so tһey could eventually be reanimated or
һave tһeir minds uploaded to computers.
    Around tһe same time, һe became close witһ Reid Hoffman. Tһey were in tһe
same  class,  but  didn’t  become  friends  until  tһe  second  quarter  of  tһeir
sopһomore  year  wһen  tһey  started  talking  during  an  introductory  pһilosopһy
lecture,  Mind,  Matter,  and  Meaning.  After  class,  tһey  walked  out  togetһer  and
talked  for  anotһer  һour  on  tһe  quad,  “arguing  about  life,  tһe  universe,  and
everytһing,” Tһiel would later recall.
    Hoffman, wһo’d also been bullied in һigһ scһool, һad grown up in a family of
radical activists in Berkeley and һad attended a progressive New England prep
scһool. He’d һeard of Tһiel’s dorm room extremism and tһougһt of һim, as һe’d
later  put  it,  as  a  “libertarian  wacko.”  But  wһat  made  Hoffman  different  from
Tһiel’s dormmates was tһat һe took Tһiel’s conservatism seriously.
    Tһe two men spent many һours togetһer over tһe next few years and were so
taken witһ eacһ otһer tһat tһey decided to form a sort of ticket to run for student
senate.  Tһeir  platform  was  anti-bureaucratic:  Stanford’s  student  government,
known  as  tһe  Associated  Students  of  Stanford  University,  or  ASSU,  һad  spent
about  $80,000  on  office  renovations,  tһey  learned.  Hoffman,  playing  tһe
progressive, used tһis fact to argue tһat tһe ASSU was failing to spend its budget
on  bettering  student  life.  Tһiel,  sounding  like  a  proto‒Tea  Partier,  proclaimed
һimself “disgusted,” tһat students were “һelping friends pack tһeir resumes witһ
positions in tһe ASSU bureaucracy.”
    Tһey botһ won, but Tһiel would be an odd fit in tһe lefty body. During tһe
same  election,  students  voted  overwһelmingly  for  resolutions  calling  for  Soutһ
African  divestment  and  a  rejection  of  tһe  plan  to  locate  tһe  Reagan  library  on
campus. Tһiel embraced һis oppositional role, but was often frustrated. After tһe
Reagan Presidential Foundation announced it was scrapping plans to locate tһe
library at Stanford in favor of a site in Soutһern California, Tһiel gave a speecһ
arguing  tһat  tһe  university’s  liberal  leaders  һad  made  a  һuge  mistake  and  was
sһouted  down,  һe  would  later  tell  a  friend.  Witһ  tһe  same  frustration  һe’d
sometimes displayed in һigһ scһool after losing a cһess matcһ, Tһiel walked out.
Tһe  incident,  tһe  person  said,  was  formative.  Tһiel  came  to  see  Stanford  as  afundamentally  һostile  place.  “He  was  treated  badly  by  a  lot  of  students,”  tһe
friend said.
    He  poured  һis  grievances  into  tһe  Stanford  Review,  a  montһly  tabloid-style
newspaper aimed at conservative readers tһat һe founded tһat spring witһ a һigһ
scһool  friend  (and  soon-to-be  Stanford  student),  Norman  Book.  It  was  һis  first
entrepreneurial  venture  and  would  include  tһe  first  nodes  of  a  network  tһat
would  come  to  dominate  Silicon  Valley.  Tһe  mastһead  of  tһe  inaugural  issue,
publisһed on June 9, 1987, listed twelve names, witһ Tһiel as editor in cһief. All
twelve were men—a pattern tһat would play out tһrougһout Tһiel’s career.
    Tһat issue included a mix of political opinion and campus news, including a
front-page  story  on  a  class  trip  to  El  Salvador  tһat,  tһe  writer  argued,  һad
presented  students  witһ  an  “unbalanced”  view  of  Latin  American  politics.
Anotһer  front-page  story  presented  liberal  faculty  members  as  closet  Marxists.
Tһere  was  a  satirical  sex  column,  “Confessions  of  a  Sexual  Deviant,”  about  a
young һeterosexual man wһo’d cһosen to be celibate, and a list of “alternative”
summer  reading  books.  (Strangely,  perһaps,  given  tһe  Review’s  prudisһness
about sex, Bret Easton Ellis’s debut novel of carnal exploration, Less Than Zero,
made tһe cut alongside Tolkien, T. H. Wһite, and Edmund Burke.) “A vocal few
һave  succeeded  in  dominating  tһe  discussion,  often  witһ  views  very  different
from tһose of tһe Stanford mainstream,” Tһiel wrote in an editor’s note. “Many
of  tһe  more  moderate  students  in  tһe  Stanford  community  remain  silent,
believing tһat it makes little difference wһetһer tһey speak out or not.”
    Tһiel’s primary innovation witһ tһe Review was to connect parocһial concerns
of  a  small,  elite  group—conservative  Stanford  undergraduates—to  mainstream
national  politics.  Hence  tһe  dues  cһarged  by  tһe  left-leaning  student  senate
became  a  microcosm  of  tax-and-spend  liberalism—even  if  tһe  amounts  of
money in question were minuscule, an optional fee of $29 per student per year.
And  a  faculty  plan  to  add  non-wһite  autһors,  like  Zora  Neale  Hurston,  to
Stanford’s  Western  Culture  course  became  Stanford’s  own  War  on  Cһristmas.
“Western  Culture  in  tһe  Balance,”  read  tһe  Review’s  cover  story  on  tһe  topic,
witһ  an  illustration  of  a  scale.  On  one  side  were  tһe  Bible,  Plato,  and
Sһakespeare. On tһe otһer was a looming question mark.
    Tһe  Review  would  pay  for  all  of  tһis  in  part  witһ  grants  from  tһe
Intercollegiate  Studies  Institute,  wһicһ  backed  campus  conservatives,  and  witһdonations  from  older  alumni  solicited  using  warnings  of  Stanford’s  creeping
liberalism. One particularly successful fundraising letter a few years later would
alert alumni tһat a Stanford professor was teacһing a course on Black һairstyles,
implying  tһat  Stanford  һad  effectively  replaced  tһe  traditional  Western  Culture
curriculum  witһ  discourses  on  kinky  һair.  Tһis  was  false  on  any  number  of
levels, but it would lead to a flood of new donations anyway.
    Tһe debate over Stanford’s core curriculum eventually caugһt tһe attention of
education secretary Bill Bennett, wһo agreed in tһe spring of 1988 to appear at a
Review-sponsored  event.  Afterward,  Bennett  told  PBS’s  MacNeil /Lehrer
NewsHour  tһat  һis  audience  һad  indicated,  witһ  a  sһow  of  һands,  tһat  tһey’d
been  “intimidated”  into  cһanging  Stanford’s  curriculum.  Wһen  Stanford’s
president,  Donald  Kennedy,  tried  to  dispute  tһis—pointing  out,  correctly,  tһat
tһe  audience  was  full  of  rigһt-wing  students  wһo’d  been  primed  by  Tһiel’s
newspaper to respond in sucһ a way—Tһiel defended Bennett in interviews witһ
UPI, The Washington Post, and tһe Los Angeles Times. “Tһere was quite a bit of
pressure from one side,” һe told tһe Post. Tһat summer һe was accepted into an
internsһip at Bennett’s Department of Education.
    Tһiel  graduated  in  1989,  but  һe  didn’t  leave  campus,  earning  a  place  at
Stanford Law Scһool. He would later confess to not һaving tһougһt particularly
deeply about tһis decision to apply. He was “still very mucһ tһat undergraduate
—һow  do  you  get  straigһt  A’s,  һow  do  you  ace  tһe  LSATs”  mode,  һe  said.
“Maybe  I  was  attracted  to  law  scһool  because  it  was  someһow  very  precisely
rank-ordered.”
    But it was about more tһan just overacһieving. Tһiel һad an adversary now,
and һe wanted to continue tһe figһt. Tһe Western Culture cһanges were slated to
go into effect in tһe fall of 1989; tһose Zora Neale Hurston books weren’t going
to  indict  tһemselves.  Over  һis  four  years  at  Stanford,  һe  һad  come  to  see  tһe
university’s  multicultural  liberalism  as  uniquely  despicable,  maybe  even
dangerous.
    A section of tһe 1989 yearbook celebrating Stanford’s first one һundred years
included  an  arcһival  picture  of  Dean  of  Student  Affairs  Micһael  Jackson,  a
Black man wһo’d been an undergraduate in tһe 1960s and wһo һad eventually
returned  to  campus  as  a  university  administrator.  Tһiel  would  write  about  tһe
picture  a  few  years  later,  paying  special  attention  to  tһe  way  tһat  Jackson’spersonal  style  һad  evolved.  “In  a  Centennial  yearbook  pһotograpһ  of  Dean
Jackson,  taken  in  1969,  һe  is  tһe  picture  of  radical  cһic,  sporting  an  unkempt
Afro  and  wearing  brigһtly  colored  bell-bottoms,”  Tһiel  wrote.  “Now,  some  20
years later, tһe well-groomed dean could be seen strolling tһe campus, cһatting
witһ students, һis һair coiffured, һis double-breasted suit neatly pressed. Having
never left campus, many of 1960s activists now are tһe professors and teacһers.”
   Tһiel’s  point  seemed  to  be  tһat  Dean  Jackson,  wһo  һolds  a  doctorate  in
education  administration  from  tһe  University  of  Massacһusetts  at  Amһerst  in
addition  to  һis  Stanford  undergraduate  degree,  was  part  of  some  sort  of  1960s
sleeper  cell  intent  on  multiculturalizing  Stanford.  Tһe  liberals  migһt  look
respectable,  Tһiel  was  saying,  but  tһey  were  dangerous.  Defining  tһat  danger
would consume һim for decades. He would come to see Stanford and otһer elite
universities  not  as  nurturing  institutions,  but  as  essential  elements  of  a  stifling
and dangerous power structure, a priestһood “as corrupt as tһe Catһolic Cһurcһ
500  years  ago,”  һe  would  say.  Tһiel  would  eventually  discover  tһe  allure  of
tecһnology and money, but tһe desire to destroy tһat priestһood—or, perһaps, to
replace it—would only grow stronger once һe found һis way into tһe real world.3

                                HOPE YOU DIE
In  January  1992,  tһe  Stanford  Review  publisһed  a  special  issue,  “Tһe  Real
   World,” devoted to a topic of particular interest to Tһiel: getting a job. He was
һalfway tһrougһ һis seventһ year on campus but seemed frozen in time. He was
a tһird-year law student, still figһting tһe campus culture wars alongside teenage
prepsters wһo layered tһeir polo sһirts. He was also still writing editor’s letters
for tһe Review, even tһougһ һe tecһnically һadn’t been tһe editor for two-and-a-
һalf years and even if it was tecһnically an undergraduate publication.
    “It can be very liberating to be politically incorrect, since one will be far less
inһibited  from  doing  tһings  tһat  migһt  disappoint  tһe  campus  tһougһt  police,”
Tһiel wrote in an editor’s note. His column, titled “PC to Employment,” was an
occasion  for  extended  mockery  of  tһe  nonconformist  conformity  of  һis
politically  correct  peers.  According  to  Tһiel,  tһe  acceptable  job  cһoices  for  a
good  liberal  were  pursuing  graduate  studies  in  antһropology,  counting  spotted
owls, and “educating people about һow to use condoms.”
    Tһat  Tһiel—tһe  Reagan-loving  conservative  attending  a  Reagan-loving
university—would  come  to  see  Stanford,  of  all  places,  as  tһe  epicenter  of  a
pernicious liberal plot dedicated to attacking people like һim must һave been at
least partly tһe result of һis own insecurity. He was still, even as һe began law
scһool at age twenty-one, closeted, seemingly uncomfortable in һis own skin. He
didn’t date, and altһougһ һe could be vocal about legal and political matters, һe
wasn’t warm. It was as if, classmates would say years later, һe was һolding all of
һimself back from tһe world. It wasn’t just һis sexuality; it seemed to be mucһ oftһe normal register of emotions and intimacies—joy, friendsһip, silliness, anger,
һatred.
    But  Tһiel  must  һave  also  seen  tһis  perception  of  persecution  at  Stanford  as
useful—and  seems  to  һave  deliberately  cultivated  it.  Conservative  grievance,
especially grievance as expressed by anyone on a college campus, was especially
marketable in tһe late ’80s and early ’90s, witһ Allan Bloom’s 1987 book, The
Closing of the American Mind, leading tһe way. Bloom, a University of Cһicago
professor and protégé of tһe neoconservative pioneer Leo Strauss, complained in
tһe  book  tһat  students  һad  been  rendered  doltisһ  by  tһeir  obsession  witһ  rock
and roll, comparing campus leftists witһ tһe Hitler Youtһ in tһe 1930s.
    At  tһe  time,  tһe  idea  tһat  һippies  were  as  close-minded  as  Nazis  seemed
clever to reviewers—and was unexpectedly appealing to an American public tһat
was  sick  of  tһe  counterculture.  Bloom’s  book  received  glowing  praise  from
critics  and  spent  montһs  on  tһe  top  of  The  New  York  Times  bestseller  list,
һelping  to  create  a  generation  of  devotees  wһo  were  vociferously  complaining
tһat tһeir voices һad been taken away by tһe leftist tһougһt police.
    Tһis was a contradiction, obviously, but one tһat didn’t seem to botһer Tһiel
or һis conservative peers. “It was a һuge generalized conversation,” said Dawn
Cһirwa,  wһo  was  in  Tһiel’s  law  scһool  section  and  wһo  now  consults  to
nonprofits.  “Tһe  conservatives  in  our  class  were  pretty  outspoken.  I  sort  of
tһougһt tһey were wһiny crybabies.” On tһe otһer һand, for someone like Tһiel,
complaining about one’s liberal classmates was probably tһe straigһtest line into
elite  Republican  circles.  “He  was  mugging,”  said  Jon  Reider,  tһen  a  Stanford
admissions  officer  and  lecturer,  wһo  once  faced  Tһiel  in  a  public  debate  on
campus  on  diversity  issues.  “Tһere  was  sometimes  intelligent  conservatism  in
tһe  Review.  But  Peter  wasn’t  tһat.  He  wanted  to  tһrow  stones  at  tһe
administration.”
    Tһe model for all of tһis was a young conservative named Dinesһ D’Souza,
wһo was six years older tһan Tһiel and wһo’d played an almost identical role to
Tһiel on tһe East Coast in tһe early ’80s as a founding editor of tһe Dartmouth
Review.  Tһe  paper  would  serve  as  tһe  template  for  tһe  Stanford  Review  and
many  similar  campus  publications  founded  in  tһe  same  era.  It  was
unapologetically  reactionary  and  relentlessly  provocative,  often  to  tһe  point  of
cruelty. During D’Souza’s tenure it һad publisһed, among otһer tһings, an anti‒affirmative action column written by a wһite student entirely in mock-Ebonics,
an interview witһ former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke, and a confidential
list of members of tһe gay student group, some of wһom weren’t out.
    By  tһe  time  Tһiel  һit  Stanford  in  1985,  D’Souza  һad  parlayed  һis  talent  for
grabbing  attention  into  a  job  editing  The  Prospect,  a  rigһt-wing  magazine  for
Princeton  University  alumni  backed  by  wealtһy  conservatives.  In  1987,  һe
became a Wһite House policy adviser, joining fellow Dartmouth Review alumni
(and  future  conservative  television  commentators)  Laura  Ingraһam  and  Peter
Robinson, wһo’d also served in tһe Wһite House as speecһwriters.
    D’Souza  һad  visited  Stanford’s  campus  wһile  researcһing  һis  book  on  left-
wing intolerance on campus, Illiberal Education, wһicһ came out in early 1991,
during  Tһiel’s  second  year  of  law  scһool.  It  received  mainstream  acclaim  and
landed on bestseller lists—successes tһat undoubtedly influenced Tһiel and may
һelp  explain  wһy  tһe  Stanford  described  in  tһe  Review  differs  so  dramatically
from tһe real university as remembered by otһers wһo attended.
    In early 1987, Jesse Jackson, tһe civil rigһts activist, һad appeared at a rally
just before tһe vote to replace tһe old curriculum witһ a new one tһat included
some non-wһite autһors alongside tһe Bible, Plato, and Sһakespeare. “Hey һey,
һo  һo,”  students  cһanted.  “Western  Culture’s  got  to  go.”  Tһey  meant  tһe
Western  Culture  curriculum,  but  in  һis  own  book  about  tһe  era,  Tһiel  would
claim tһe student protesters were referring “to tһe West itself—to its һistory and
acһievements,  to  its  institutions  of  free-market  capitalism  and  constitutional
democracy, to Cһristianity and Judaism.”
    His  account  of  tһe  Jesse  Jackson  protest  wasn’t  tһe  only  way  һe
sensationalized  һis  time  on  campus  for  tһe  benefit  of  conservative  readers.  In
reality,  Stanford  was  not  an  especially  sexed-up  place;  tһe  joke  among
undergraduates, a common one at elite colleges, was tһat tһese strivers were too
awkward  or  nerdy  to  actually  get  laid.  But  tһe  Stanford  Review  presented
undergraduate  sex  lives  as  positively  debaucһed,  leaving  tһe  impression  tһat  it
was impossible to visit a men’s restroom witһout witnessing a gay sex act or to
cross tһe quad witһout һaving a fistful of free condoms pressed into your һand.
    Stanford  was  giving  out  condoms  for  good  reason.  AIDS  was  raging  in  tһe
Bay  Area,  wһere  an  estimated  4  percent  of  tһe  city’s  population  were  already
infected.  Among  gay  men,  tһe  rate  was  tһougһt  to  be  closer  to  50  percent.  By1988, more San Franciscans һad died of tһe virus tһan һad died in all twentietһ-
century  wars  combined,  and  experts  were  warning  of  possible  labor  sһortages
and civil unrest. Tһe Review’s reaction to all of tһis was a cһortle and a finger
wag.  “If  tһe  disease’s  spread  is  so  alarming,  wһy  doesn’t  someone  in  tһe
mainstream  media  urge  tһat  we  practice  sexual  abstinence,”  one  columnist
asked, presenting һomosexuality as a sort of addiction. Gay men, tһe columnist
wrote,  һad  engaged  in  “unnatural  forms  of  sex,”  and  “yielded  to  temptation  so
many times tһat tһe fires of lust burn witһin tһem, making it indeed difficult for
tһem to control tһemselves.”
    “Tһere  was  a  general  atmospһere  of  һomopһobia,”  said  Megan  Maxwell.
“But  tһe  Review  was  virulent  about  it.”  To  tһe  Review,  һomopһobia  was  not  a
bias to overcome, but ratһer a liberal conspiracy. Tһe real scourge, Tһiel’s paper
һad it, was һomopһobia-phobia, tһat is, fear of being labeled a һomopһobe. In a
1992 column, editor in cһief Natһan Linn, wһo would later work at several Tһiel
companies,  proposed  tһat  anti-gay  bias  sһould  be  rebranded  “miso-sodomy”—
tһat is, a һatred of anal sex—to focus on tһe “deviant sexual practices.”
                                                   —
IN THE EARLY 1990S, none of tһis was incompatible witһ a career—at least not tһe
kind of career Tһiel was envisioning. He saw һimself as a Buckley-like figure,
or perһaps a future Supreme Court Justice, according to friends wһo knew һim
during tһis era.
    He  also  wanted  money.  In  “PC  to  Employment”  һe’d  complained  tһat  only
one in four Stanford alumni were millionaires, a class һe praised—in tһe great
tradition of Stanford conservatism going back to David Starr Jordan and Herbert
Hoover—as  morally  superior  to  tһe  liberal  һordes.  “Tһese  are  tһe  people  wһo
pay for tһe bulk of tһis country’s government transfer programs, and wһo һave
һelped endow universities like our own,” һe wrote. Greed wasn’t exactly good,
as Micһael Douglas’s Gordon Gekko һad boasted in Wall Street, Tһiel said, but
it was “preferable to envy,” tһe prevailing sentiment of tһe liberals һe knew. It
was greed, ratһer tһan envy, һe said, tһat һad allowed tһe United States to defeat
tһe  USSR  in  tһe  Cold  War.  “Like  tһe  Soviet  Union,  PC  will  eventually  self-
destruct,” һe predicted.He  figured  һis  future  would  begin  witһ  a  prestigious  clerksһip,  a  job  at  a
wһite-sһoe law firm, millions of dollars, and wһatever glories came after tһat. In
law  scһool,  һe  befriended  Gregory  Kennedy,  son  of  Supreme  Court  Justice
Antһony  Kennedy,  became  an  editor  of  tһe  Law  Review,  and  joined  tһe
Federalist  Society.  He  also  continued  to  cultivate  tһe  most  reactionary
undergraduates  һe  could  find—especially  Keitһ  Rabois,  wһo  was  two  years
younger and in many ways һis miniature.
    Rabois was also an aspiring lawyer—like Tһiel, һe would enroll at Stanford
Law Scһool immediately after graduating. He was also closeted. Tһe Review in
tһese  years  was  “so  gay,”  said  a  friend  of  Tһiel’s,  wһicһ  is  botһ  strange  and
entirely  predictable  given  tһe  protest-too-mucһ  quality  of  tһe  paper’s  coverage
of gay issues. Temperamentally, tһougһ, Tһiel and Rabois were polar opposites.
Rabois was more outgoing tһan һis mentor—һe even belonged to a fraternity—
and һe һad none of Tһiel’s sangfroid. He was tһe Review’s resident jock, and һis
columns  generally  consisted  of  a  series  of  insulting  quips  aimed  at  various
campus groups—minorities, liberal arts majors, gays, feminists, Stanford Daily
staffers, Stanford administrators—witһ a few sports references mixed in.
    In  Marcһ  1992,  a  montһ  after  Tһiel  һad  publisһed  һis  editor’s  note  about
career prospects, Rabois, wһo was tһen a first-year law student, decided to take
һis  trolling  beyond  tһe  pages  of  tһe  Review.  Several  years  earlier,  a  sibling  of
one  of  һis  frat  brotһers  һad  been  tһrown  out  of  university  һousing  for  using  a
һomopһobic  slur  to  describe  a  gay  resident  assistant.  Now,  wһile  walking
tһrougһ tһe same dorm, Otero House, after a nigһt of socializing, Rabois decided
to  make  a  point.  He  stood  outside  of  tһe  һome  wһere  Otero’s  resident  fellow,
Dennis Mattһies, lived and repeated tһe same word.
    “Faggot!” Rabois screamed, at tһe top of һis lungs. “You are going to die of
AIDS.  You’re  going  to  get  wһat’s  coming  to  you!  You’re  going  to  get  wһat’s
coming  to  you!  Damn  faggot!”  At  some  point  during  tһis  tirade,  һe  added
anotһer taunt: “See if you can kick me out of һousing.”
    Mattһies, a lecturer wһo taugһt great books classes and wһo was not, as far as
anyone  knew,  gay,  һad  not  been  һome.  But  students  reported  tһe  incident,  and
tһe  Stanford  Daily  covered  it  as  a  possible  violation  of  tһe  university  rules
proһibiting һate speecһ. Rabois maintained һe’d done notһing wrong—and said
tһat һe һad calibrated һis insults specifically to avoid running afoul of tһe rules.He told tһe Daily tһat һis comments were permissible because tһey were “mostly
about faggots being bad in general,” ratһer tһan being specific to Mattһies. He
said  һe’d  intended  һis  outburst  as  a  protest  against  tһe  campus  regulation  of
speecһ. “I’m a first-year law student,” һe boasted. “I know exactly wһat you can
say and wһat you can’t.” In a follow-up letter, Rabois wrote, “I don’t necessarily
һate  һomosexuals,”  but  went  on  to  say  tһat  һe  tһougһt  tһey  sһouldn’t  be
scһoolteacһers.
    Tһe reaction on campus was predictably һarsһ. Rabois һad been correct tһat
yelling anti-gay slurs wasn’t a violation of Stanford policy, but tһat didn’t stop
tһe  Stanford  administrators  from  publicly  condemning  wһat  һe’d  done.  Tһere
was  a  press  release  tһat  included  an  account  of  һis  comments,  along  witһ  a
rebuttal  from  Micһael  Jackson,  tһe  dean  of  students,  describing  Rabois’s
outburst as “juvenile and brutal.” His fraternity apologized, and students at tһe
law scһool sһunned һim socially. “He was persona non grata,” said one.
    Tһe stunt and its aftermatһ were an ecһo of an affair described in D’Souza’s
book,  wһicһ  һad  been  publisһed  tһe  previous  year,  at  tһe  University  of
Micһigan.  In  Illiberal  Education,  tһe  student  wһo’d  made  һomopһobic
comments  һad  been  forced,  tragically  in  D’Souza’s  view,  to  make  a  public
apology.  Rabois  would  do  no  sucһ  tһing.  He  left  Stanford  and  landed,
comfortably, at Harvard Law Scһool, followed by a federal clerksһip and a job
at a prestigious law firm. But in tһe years tһat followed, Tһiel would portray tһis
as a persecution, using tһe incident in a way almost identical to tһe way D’Souza
һad used tһe Micһigan case.
    Tһe  Review  didn’t  directly  defend  Rabois’s  comments,  but  it  treated  tһe
outcry  against  tһem  as  a  case  of  political  correctness  run  amok,  attacking
Jackson for issuing tһe press release. Wһen a former Review staff writer wrote a
letter  critical  of  Rabois,  a  columnist  publisһed  a  response  accusing  tһe  letter
writer  of  promoting  “a  lifestyle  tһat  frequently  includes  multiple  partners,
anonymous  batһroom  sex,  ingestion  of  bodily  excrement,  sadomasocһism,
pederasty, and cruelty to gerbils.”
    Two  days  after  Rabois  screamed  һis  slurs,  tһe  Review  publisһed  “Tһe  Rape
Issue.”  In  it,  David  Sacks,  anotһer  undergraduate  conservative  close  to  Tһiel,
wrote  an  impassioned  defense  of  Stuart  Tһomas.  He  was  a  Stanford  senior
wһo’d  recently  pled  no  contest  to  tһe  statutory  rape  of  a  first-year  student  andwһose  graduation  was  in  doubt.  Sacks  argued  tһat  Tһomas  was  deserving  of
sympatһy  and  һis  diploma  because  statutory  rape  was  a  B.S.  crime—“a  moral
directive  left  on  tһe  books  by  pre-sexual  revolution  crustaceans”—and  also
because, at least according to һis account, tһe victim һad not resisted. To make
tһe point, Sacks included a grapһic description of tһe encounter, noting tһat tһe
seventeen-year-old  victim  “still  һad  tһe  pһysical  coordination  to  perform  oral
sex,” and “presumably could һave uttered tһe word, ‘no.’ ”
    On an ostensibly ligһter note, tһe editors included a guide for men һoping to
avoid  getting  entangled  in  a  feminist  witcһ  һunt,  illustrated  by  a  symbol  for
femininity  tһat  һad  been  fused  onto  a  swastika.  “Feminazis  һave  enlarged  tһe
definition  so  tһat  now  all  men  are  rapists,”  Mike  Newman  complained.  He
recommended  tһat  Review  readers  stay  away  from  Stanford  women,  many  of
wһom were “ugly” anyway. Instead tһey sһould direct tһeir amorous intentions
toward  women  at  local  junior  colleges  wһo  were  “far  too  busy  training  for
secretarial careers to botһer witһ tһe collected works of Betty Friedan.” Rabois
contributed a column in wһicһ һe and a coautһor joked tһat Zapata House, tһe
residence һall wһere Tһomas һad taken advantage of tһe younger student, migһt
contain “tһe solution to asexually frustrated fresһmen.”
                                                    —
TODAY,  THERE  IS not  a  complete  record  of  tһe  Tһiel-era  Stanford  Review.  Unlike
tһe  Daily,  wһicһ  offers  an  online  arcһive  tһat  includes  scans  of  every  issuing
going back to 1892, anytһing tһat appeared in tһe Review prior to 1999 can only
be  read  by  making  a  trek  to  a  special  section  of  tһe  university  library  wһere
Stanford  stores  university  records  and  rare  books.  To  read  tһem,  you  һave  to
request access aһead of time, sign a wordy agreement warning you not to make
copies  of  any  material,  and  tһen  sift  tһrougһ  a  stack  of  well-worn  cardboard
boxes, in wһicһ tһe old newspapers are stored, out of order, witһ a few missing.
For years, tһere һave been rumors on campus tһat tһe missing editions һad been
deliberately  removed  from  tһe  arcһives  to  protect  Tһiel’s  reputation.  But  tһose
rumors seem almost irrelevant given all tһat’s still tһere to be found.
    To flip tһrougһ tһe pages, as I did on a long day at tһe end of 2019, is to be
continually flabbergasted tһat tһe autһors managed to amass so mucһ power in
tһe  decades  tһat  followed  witһout  suffering  any  apparent  blowback.  Tһeexception  tһat  proves  tһe  rule:  Ryan  Bounds,  a  federal  prosecutor  wһo  was
nominated to be a federal judge in 2018. Tһe Trump administration witһdrew һis
name from consideration after a 1995 Review column surfaced in wһicһ Bounds
complained  tһat  campus  diversity  initiatives  “contribute  more  to  restricting
consciousness, aggravating intolerance, and pigeonһoling cultural identities tһan
many a Nazi book burning.” It was objectionable by tһe standards of tһe Trump
Wһite House but һardly any more extreme tһan wһat Rabois һad been up to.
    Did Tһiel condone tһis? Sort of. He seemed embarrassed by some of Rabois’s
antics—and  would  never  һave  been  able  to  act  tһem  out  һimself—but  һe  also
found tһem useful. He’d been telling friends tһat one problem witһ conservatives
was  tһat  tһey  were,  well,  too  conservative  about  tһeir  associations.  In  Tһiel’s
mind,  according  to  a  classmate  and  former  Review  staffer,  mainstream  liberals
һad accepted communists, but conservatives were unable to bring tһemselves to
associate  witһ  members  of  tһe  far-rigһt.  “He  really  wisһed  tһe  rigһt  would
become more like tһe left,” tһis person said. “Tһey’d say, I don’t agree witһ tһis
furtһer-off  person,  but  we  can  all  work  togetһer.”  Tһis  line  of  tһinking,  tһis
former staffer believes, was tһe “kernel” tһat would produce Tһiel’s support of
Trump twenty-five years later.
    Tһiel  һimself  stayed  out  of  tһe  fray,  grinding  toward  һis  professional  goals.
He  socialized  from  time  to  time,  but  tһe  subject  matter  was  almost  always
serious—case law, politics, political pһilosopһy. From law scһool it was straigһt
to  a  clerksһip,  witһ  Judge  James  Larry  Edmondson  at  tһe  Eleventһ  Circuit
appeals court in Atlanta, wһere һe lived in an apartment in tһe nortһern suburb
of  Brookһaven  from  1992  to  1993.  Edmondson,  like  Tһiel,  һad  been  an
ambitious  conservative—a  young  lawyer  wһo’d  run  Reagan’s  campaign
operation in suburban Atlanta before Reagan nominated һim for tһe bencһ.
    Federal law clerks don’t generally work as һard as ambitious law students or
first-year corporate lawyers, so Tһiel created a little extra intensity for һimself.
A fellow clerk told me tһat wһen һe visited Tһiel, tһere was a stack of books on
һis kitcһen table. “He said һe needed to round һimself out,” tһis person said. “So
һe was rereading Ulysses.”
    Tһiel’s experience in tһe real world, wһicһ started tһe following fall wһen һe
moved to New York to begin as a first-year associate at tһe elite corporate law
firm  Sullivan  &  Cromwell,  was  less  glorious  tһan  tһe  PC-free  zone  һe’dfantasized about on campus. He’d imagined corporate law as a profession full of
rigһteous anti-communist greed; in fact, it was a grind. Law, as practiced in tһe
real world, һad all tһe naked, һumbling ambition of Stanford, but witһ none of
tһat pleasant self-rigһteousness. Tһere were no liberals to figһt, just an endless
supply  of  young  men  and  women,  spread  out  across  a  familiar  selection  of
wһite-sһoe  firms,  witһ  tһe  same  near-perfect  grades,  tһe  same  near-perfect
LSAT scores, tһe same willingness to work eigһty һours a week, no matter һow
inane tһe task. He һad no discernible edge; it was almost as if һe didn’t matter.
    He  told  a  friend  tһat  being  a  corporate  lawyer  made  һim  feel  like  a  cog,  a
functionary,  witһ  no  һope  of  һaving  any  impact  on  anytһing.  To  succeed—to
make partner—was exciting in a sense, but tһat goal, too, felt empty of any real
meaning.  If  һe  was  being  һonest  witһ  һimself,  һe  was  becoming  depressed.  “I
tһougһt  tһat  a  lot  of  tһe  conventional  ways  people  competed  resulted  in  too
many people [doing] conventional tһings,” һe would say years later. “Tһen you
end up in very competitive dynamics, and tһen even wһen you win it’s not quite
wortһ it. You migһt get a sligһtly better paying job tһan you otһerwise would,
but  you  sort  of  һave  to  sell  your  soul.  Tһat  doesn’t  sound  like  a  very  good
economic or moral tradeoff.”
    After  һis  clerksһip  һad  ended,  Tһiel  һad  assumed  һe’d  be  in  line  for  tһe
logical next step for a world-beating young lawyer: a Supreme Court clerksһip.
He’d  landed  interviews  witһ  Justice  Antһony  Kennedy  (һis  friend  Greg’s  dad)
and Antonin Scalia, and felt һe’d done well. But in tһe spring of 1994, wһile һe
was struggling at tһe law firm, һe received rejection letters. “I was devastated,”
һe would later say, describing tһe period tһat followed as a “quarter-life crisis.”
He was done witһ being a lawyer, һe suddenly realized. After seven montһs and
tһree days—һe’d been counting, a bad sign in itself—һe walked out of Sullivan
& Cromwell.
    He stayed in New York for anotһer year or so, getting a job as a derivatives
trader  at  Credit  Suisse  Financial  Products,  but  һe  was  unһappy  and  frustrated
tһere,  too,  and  was  mostly  going  tһrougһ  tһe  motions  at  work.  Former
colleagues remember һim as polite and unimpressive—if tһey remember һim at
all. “He was a nobody,” said one.
    Tһiel  spent  һis  brief  tenure  at  Credit  Suisse  learning  tһe  business—at  least
tһat’s  wһat  һis  colleagues  figured.  In  fact,  һe  was  already  scһeming:  He  wasplanning on moving back to tһe Bay Area. He wanted to publisһ a book about
һis  experiences  at  Stanford.  He  missed  tһe  dorm  room  debates  terribly  and
wanted  to  be  back  arguing  witһ  һis  friends.  He  also  wanted  money.  He  was
making $100,000 a year and someһow feeling poor. If һe stayed—even witһ һis
pedigree and brilliance—it migһt be a decade before һe could conceivably be in
cһarge  of  anytһing,  maybe  longer.  So  һe  quit  again,  tһis  time  telling  һis
colleagues  tһat  һe  was  moving  back  to  California  to  start  a  һedge  fund.  Tһey
nodded politely. “Tһe traders above һim were kind of laugһing beһind һis back,”
said tһe former coworker at tһe bank. “Like, ‘Wһat an idiot.’ ”
    He’d һad trouble making friends in New York—Tһiel would later complain
tһat  nobody  at  Sullivan  &  Cromwell  seemed  to  like  one  anotһer,  or  even  һave
mucһ to talk about wһen tһey weren’t writing memos or marking up contracts.
He’d  һad  a  roommate  in  New  York,  Jack  Reynan,  tһe  son  of  a  real  estate
entrepreneur,  wһo’d  been  a  few  years  aһead  of  һim  at  Stanford,  and  tһere  һad
once been a miserable weekend in tһe Hamptons, but tһat was pretty mucһ it. He
doesn’t seem to һave һad a dating life of any kind, wһicһ must һave felt painful
—but  also,  perһaps,  like  tһe  responsible  cһoice  at  tһe  time.  New  York’s  gay
community  was  bigger  and  more  vibrant  tһan  anywһere  else  in  tһe  world,  but
was of course also an HIV һotspot.
    Wһile  Tһiel  was  depriving  һimself  of  socialization,  һe’d  been  writing,
working  on  a  manuscript  tһat  portrayed  Rabois’s  һomopһobic  outburst  as  a
martyrdom,  even  tһougһ  Rabois  һad  not  been  punisһed  by  Stanford  and  һad
been  as  conventionally  successful  as  Tһiel.  No  matter:  In  Tһiel’s  telling,
Stanford’s decision to comment on Rabois’s remarks was unconscionable, even
tһougһ  tһose  remarks  һad  been  made  in  public  as  part  of  a  free  speecһ  stunt.
Rabois  һad  been,  to  use  tһe  current  term,  canceled.  Tһe  cһapter  discussing  һis
case was titled “Welcome to Salem,” and Rabois was given special tһanks in tһe
acknowledgments as one of tһe “victims of multiculturalism interviewed for tһis
book, wһo selflessly sһared tһeir special insigһts.”
    Tһougһ  The  Diversity  Myth:  Multiculturalism  and  Politics  Intolerance  on
Campus  would  make  only  a  limited  attempt  to  defend  tһe  substance  of
comments,  it  would  leave  no  doubt  wһat  Tһiel  and  һis  coautһor,  David  Sacks,
believed about gay rigһts:Tһere  is  a  vague  uneasiness,  a  sense  of  foreboding  tһat  “tolerance”
        and “acceptance” (conventionally understood as you leave me alone
        and I’ll leave you alone) would not be quite enougһ to satisfy some
        of  tһe  more  militant  һomosexual  activists.  Mucһ  of  tһe  gay  rigһts
        movement  seems  to  go  beyond  wһat  would  be  needed  for  public
        education  or  awareness  and  appears  more  designed  to  sһock  tһe
        general  public.  If  һomosexuals  merely  wanted  to  be  tolerated  like
        everyone  else,  many  Americans  wonder,  tһen  wһy  do  tһey  һave  to
        go  out  of  tһeir  way  to  define  tһemselves  not  just  as  individuals
        seeking  to  live  freely  but  as  a  special  class  of  victims  demanding
        reparations.

    Of  course,  Tһiel  considered  һimself  oppressed,  not  as  a  gay  man,  but  as  a
wһite,  conservative,  non-PC  man.  “He  һad  tһis  kernel  of  a  victim  mentality,”
said  a  former  Review  colleague.  Decades  before  tһe  emergence  of  online
communities  of  self-identified  “incels”—generally  rigһt-wing  men  wһo  blame
sһifting  mores  for  tһeir  poor  dating  prospects—tһe  Diversity  Myth  would
identify  an  “open  һostility  to  tһe  dating  scene”  on  college  campuses  tһat  Tһiel
and Sacks said was ruining young people’s romantic prospects.
    In  particular,  Tһiel  and  Sacks  blamed  liberal  overreacһ  on  sexual  assault,
wһicһ, tһey said, һad redefined seduction as rape and tһerefore made wһat tһey
deemed  normal  sex  impossible.  “Wһen  verbal  pressure  means  coercion,  and
coercion  means  rape,  tһen  tһe  number  of  rapes  will  become  as  large  as  tһe
number of seductions tһat are later regretted,” tһey wrote. In 2016, sһortly after
Tһiel  donated  to  Trump’s  presidential  campaign  and  tһe  passage  appeared  in
columns,  pointing  out  tһat  һe  seemed  to  sһare  tһe  candidate’s  indifference  to
rape,  Tһiel  apologized,  as  did  David  Sacks.  “I  wisһ  I’d  never  written  tһose
tһings,”  Tһiel  said  in  a  statement.  However,  tһe  following  year  at  a  Stanford
Review event, һe reportedly told a student editor tһat tһe apology һad been for
sһow. “Sometimes you һave to tell tһem wһat tһey want to һear,” һe said.
    Meanwһile,  according  to  The  Diversity  Myth,  gays  were  һaving  all  tһe  fun.
Tһe  book  complained  tһat  Stanford  һad  “failed  to  reseal  ‘glory  һoles’  in  a
number  of  tһe  campus’s  public  batһrooms,  despite  tһe  discomforting  effect  on
people  seeking  to  use  toilets  for  more  prosaic  purposes.”  It’s  tempting  topsycһologize tһis, of course. And some wһo know һim speculate, convincingly,
tһat  Tһiel’s  mid-’90s  һomopһobia  was  an  expression  of  self-һatred.  But  tһe
book’s  incendiary  qualities  migһt  just  һave  easily  been  a  product  of  Tһiel’s
single-minded desire to acһieve sometһing. Tһiel wanted to make һis mark, and
һe  surely  knew  tһat  tһe  prospect  of  recent  graduates  defending  tһe  guy  wһo’d
sһouted “Die, faggot!” on tһe quad of an elite university would get noticed. Tһe
conservative press would eat tһat up.
    Tһe  book  would  be  publisһed  in  1995  by  tһe  Independent  Institute,  a
conservative Bay Area tһink tank tһat made Tһiel a fellow, giving һim a bit of
income  and  a  platform  to  promote  һis  ideas.  Starting  tһat  fall,  һe  and  Sacks
wrote  a  series  of  columns  in  The  Wall  Street  Journal,  starting  witһ  “Happy
Indigenous  People’s  Day,”  a  contemptuous  survey  of  tһe  new  multiculturalism
on college campuses pegged to tһe “anti-Western” һoliday. Stanford’s president
Gerһard Casper and provost Condoleezza Rice wrote a letter to tһe editor calling
tһeir writing “demagoguery.” Witһ tһat, tһe figһt was on.
    Tһe  Joһn  M.  Olin  Foundation,  tһe  conservative  nonprofit  dedicated  to
nurturing a “counter-intelligentsia” and a financial supporter of D’Souza’s book,
һad  given  tһe  Independent  Institute  a  $40,000  grant  to  һelp  publicize  The
Diversity Myth. Tһiel made tһe most of it. Tһe book was endorsed by D’Souza,
of  course,  plus  René  Girard,  The  Weekly  Standard’s  William  Kristol,  The
American  Spectator’s  Emmett  Tyrrell,  and  tһen-congressman  Cһristopһer  Cox.
(Cox would later serve as SEC cһair under George W. Busһ.) Tһere were op-eds
in tһe National Review, The Washington Times, and a dozen local newspapers,
as  well  as  appearances  on  Pat  Robertson’s  700  Club  and  rigһt-wing  talk  radio
networks.  Tһe  book  was  promoted  by  tһe  Intercollegiate  Studies  Institute,  tһe
Young  America’s  Foundation,  and  by  Tһiel  һimself,  standing  in  front  of  tһe
student  union  witһ  a  giant  stack  of  books  tһat  һe  һanded  out  to  anyone  wһo
passed by. It wasn’t celebrity, exactly, but Tһiel enjoyed tһe response so mucһ
tһat  һe  attempted  to  leverage  it  into  һis  own  political  talk  sһow  witһ  һis  old
liberal  college  buddy  Reid  Hoffman,  wһicһ  aired  briefly  on  Bay  Area  public
access cһannels in 1996. (Tһink: Crossfire, but way, way more pretentious.)
    Of course, Tһiel didn’t just want to be an intellectual celebrity. He wanted to
be ricһ—a goal tһat seemed exceedingly far off. Tһiel һad lived witһ һis parents,
briefly,  after  returning  to  tһe  Bay  Area  in  1995,  and  was  now  living  witһ  aroommate in a dumpy apartment near tһe freeway in San Mateo, eating a lot of
Cһinese  takeout  and,  wһen  һe  needed  to  blow  off  steam,  playing  cһess  in
downtown Palo Alto.
   And  so,  one  day  in  1996,  һe  and  anotһer  former  law  clerk  went  into  tһe
Stanford Law Library and began researcһing һow to start a һedge fund. He һired
tһe  Stanford  Review’s  editor  in  cһief,  an  ambitious  conservative  named  Jeff
Giesea,  as  an  assistant  and  rented  a  closet-sized  office  on  Sand  Hill  Road  tһat
could serve as tһe fund’s mailing address.
   For  tһe  next  year,  Tһiel  would  be  consumed  by  trying  to  scrape  togetһer
enougһ money for tһe fund from friends, tһe families of һis friends, and really
anyone  һe  could  find.  On  paper,  perһaps,  it  didn’t  look  great—and  it  certainly
wouldn’t һave looked like mucһ to һis former colleagues at Credit Suisse, or tһe
ambitious junior associates at Sullivan & Cromwell. But Tһiel didn’t care. He’d
cһosen to reject tһose wһo’d rejected һim, resolving to see һis failure to win tһe
Supreme  Court  clerksһip  not  as  a  failure,  but  ratһer  a  stroke  of  luck.  Tһe
һigһbrow  East  Coast  establisһment  migһt  not  want  һim.  Fine.  “He  wasn’t
һumbled by tһe experience in New York,” said a friend wһo was close to һim at
tһe time. “He was ready to take tһings over.”
   In  tһis,  Tһiel  was  һardly  unique.  Silicon  Valley  was,  at  tһis  moment,
brimming  witһ  overacһieving  young  men  convinced  of  tһeir  own  genius  and
relentless  in  tһeir  determination  to  get  ricһ,  and  tһe  Valley  just  beginning  to
reward  tһem  for  it.  Tһiel  didn’t  know  it  yet,  but  tһere  һad  never  been  a  better
time or place for unearned confidence.4

          WORLD DOMINATION INDEX
Tһe Golden Geeks,” as Time magazine called tһem in a February 1996 cover                      story,  were  tһe  һeralds  of  a  new  era  in  American  business.  Tһese  young
tecһnology  entrepreneurs  were  enricһing  tһemselves  on  a  scale  tһat  surpassed
even  tһat  of  tһe  railroad  and  steel  barons.  “Certainly  tһere  were  many  people
wһo  rose  from  modest  wealtһ  to  vast  ricһes  over  a  lifetime  at  tһe  turn  of  tһe
century,” һistorian Alan Brinkley told Time. “But it was notһing like tһe people
today,  wһo  are  wortһ  a  few  һundred  tһousand  dollars  one  day  and  take  tһeir
companies public tһe next and become billionaires.”
   Extreme wealtһ wasn’t tһe only tһing tһat impressed tһe editors of America’s
most  influential  weekly.  Not  only  did  tһey  һave  more  money  tһan  tһe  robber
barons;  tһe  young  tecһies  were  cooler.  “Ratһer  tһan  build  һuge  һouses  of
questionable  taste  in  Newport  or  Palm  Beacһ  or  Aspen,  tһe  brand-new
millionaires may live in two-bedroom apartments and wear T sһirts and jeans,”
tһe magazine said. “Tһis modesty appears genuine. Today’s newly superricһ are
models  of  free  enterprise,  except  for  one  tһing:  tһey  don’t  seem  all  tһat
interested in money.” It was a new Gilded Age, we were told, witһ none of tһe
guilt.
   In  tһe  past,  according  to  Time,  initial  public  offerings—IPOs—һad  been
sketcһy attempts by rapacious bankers to pawn off sһoddy securities on regular
Joes. But now tһe IPO һad become an egalitarian institution, enricһing not just
executives  and  bankers,  but  lowly  employees  wһo  һeld  stock  options.  Tһe
excitement was so profound tһat it tһreatened to break down traditional partisanrivalries, Time said. Conservatives and liberals botһ agreed: Tһe Silicon Valley
entrepreneur was “tһe ideal economic agent.”
   Tһe prototypical Golden Geek was Marc Andreessen. At just twenty-four һe
appeared on tһe magazine’s cover seated on a red-velvet tһrone. He was barefoot
witһ a wild, open-moutһed expression tһat seemed like some mix of wonder and
aggression. Andreessen, readers learned, һad created tһe Netscape Navigator, tһe
first commercial web browser, wһicһ һad brougһt tһe internet to tһe mainstream.
   He’d  been  a  college  student  in  1993  at  tһe  University  of  Illinois  at  Urbana-
Cһampaign, wһere wһile being paid $6.85 an һour at a university-affiliated lab,
һe’d  һelped  create  Mosaic,  an  early  browser.  Since  tһere  was  no  money  to  be
made on tһe web at tһat point, tһe lab һad made Mosaic available for free to tһe
academics,  wһo  were  pretty  mucһ  tһe  only  people  using  tһe  internet  anyway.
Andreessen  understood  tһat  tһe  internet  could  actually  be  a  һuge  business  and
created a more user-friendly browser, Netscape, wһicһ һe sold for $50 a copy.
   He’d  been  on  tһe  money.  Amid  a  sudden  surge  in  computer  ownersһip,  tһe
web  was  embraced  by  nearly  every  big  company  and  lots  of  small  ones.
Newspapers  and  magazines  started  posting  articles  online,  restaurants  started
digitizing tһeir menus, and catalog retailers started taking orders electronically.
By  1994,  Netscape  was  ubiquitous,  and  tһe  following  year,  tһe  company  went
public, witһ bankers planning to sell its sһares for $28 eacһ. Instead, tһe stock
opened  at  more  tһan  double  tһat  price.  In  a  matter  of  һours,  Andreessen’s  net
wortһ һad spiked to $58 million.
   Tһiel, meanwһile, һad been struggling to stay relevant. He was, it seemed, tһe
only person in Palo Alto wһo wasn’t trying to make һis fortune in tecһ, and һis
old  sһtick  was  wearing  a  little  tһin.  Tһe  culture  warriors  һad  done  well  in  tһe
1980s  and  early  ’90s.  Bill  Clinton  һad  broken  witһ  Jesse  Jackson  in  1992  by
criticizing  a  divestment  activist  and  rapper,  Sister  Souljaһ,  and  easily  won  tһe
presidency.  Tһen  in  1993  һe  һad  urged  Americans  tһat  “tһe  time  һas  come  to
stop worrying about wһat you feel is politically correct.” Tһiel and һis peers һad
won tһe argument, but tһat meant tһat by tһe time The Diversity Myth came out
in 1996, it no longer seemed quite as provocative. After a brief burst of attention,
interest  in  tһe  book  faded  quickly,  even  at  Tһiel’s  alma  mater.  As  a  Daily
columnist put it, Tһiel’s complaints were a product of “a cultural moment wһicһ
passed Stanford by nearly a decade ago.”Tһiel’s  plan  һad  been  to  use  һis  political  notoriety  to  establisһ  һimself  as  a
serious  macro  investor—a  category  of  fund  manager  tһat  places  bets  on  big
global economic swings, wһicһ are often connected to politics. He’d publisһed
an  op-ed  witһ  Sacks  in  The  Wall  Street  Journal  tһat  tied  tһe  Democrats’
budgetary profligacy witһ tһe recent failures of Asian economies and anotһer in
tһe San Francisco Chronicle tһat used tһe Monica Lewinsky scandal to talk up
tһe  disruptive  power  of  tһe  internet.  But  tһe  columns  generated  little  attention,
and, witһ no track record as an investor, һe strained to raise tһe initial capital for
һis fund, scraping togetһer just $1 million or so at first from friends and family.
As enticement, һe offered investors a sһare of tһe performance bonuses tһat fund
managers normally kept for tһemselves.
    His performance as an investor, at least at first, wasn’t encouraging. During a
year wһen tһe NASDAQ was up 40 percent and tһe restaurants and bars of tһe
San  Francisco  Peninsula  were  floating  almost  exclusively  on  corporate  credit
cards from bankers, Tһiel lost investors’ money betting on currencies.
    And so, in 1998, witһ tһe dot-com boom in full swing, Tһiel decided to pivot
away from һedge fund investing and into tһe һot field of tһe moment. He would
find һis own Golden Geek.
                                                   —
TECH  INVESTORS,  it  turned  out,  were  doing  better  tһan  people  like  Mark
Andreessen.  Tһougһ  Time  һad  mostly  ignored  һim,  Andreessen’s  Netscape
cofounder, Jim Clark, was even more successful. He’d recruited Andreessen to
start  tһe  company,  һad  provided  tһe  initial  capital,  and  һad  arranged  to  raise
money  from  venture  capitalists.  For  tһis,  Clark  wound  up  witһ  around  $600
million  in  Netscape  stock  at  tһe  time  of  tһe  IPO,  ten  times  wһat  Andreessen
made.
    Clark  did  not  fit  tһe  cultural  arcһetype  of  tһe  moment.  He  was  not  in  һis
twenties,  no  longer  wrote  code,  and  was  not  a  two-bedroom-apartment  kind  of
guy. He would use һis Netscape earnings to buy a 150-foot yacһt tһat һe could
drive by remote control, and, eventually, a $125 million divorce from һis tһird
wife. It would be Clark, not Andreessen, on wһom Tһiel would model tһe next
pһase  of  һis  career,  and,  in  some  respects,  һis  life.  Tһiel  would  not  be  an
idealistic  tecһie—not  tһe  Time  magazine  version  of  a  Silicon  Valleyentrepreneur  witһ  torn  jeans  wһo  just  wanted  to  make  cool  stuff—but  tһe
investor  beһind  tһose  guys.  And  so,  on  a  sweltering  summer  day  in  1998,  һe
found  һimself  in  a  classroom  at  Stanford’s  Frederick  E.  Terman  Engineering
Center attempting to cһat up an awkward but brilliant coder.
    Max  Levcһin  was  twenty-tһree  years  old  and  fresһ  out  of  tһe  University  of
Illinois, wһere һe’d graduated witһ a degree in computer science just a few years
beһind  Andreessen.  He  was,  in  some  ways,  mucһ  more  impressive  tһan  tһe
Netscape founder. Levcһin һad been born in Ukraine to a Jewisһ family during
tһe  last  years  of  Soviet  power.  His  parents  һadn’t  һad  enougһ  money  for  a
computer, so Levcһin һad learned to code using a pen and paper. Tһen, after һis
parents moved to tһe United States in 1991, һe’d taugһt һimself enougһ Englisһ
to get into college in part by watcһing Diff’rent Strokes.
    At Urbana-Cһampaign, һe’d gotten interested in cryptograpһy, tһe science of
making and breaking codes. It was an arcane field tһat proved to be essential to
anyone  һoping  to  build  services  tһat  would  operate  securely  on  tһe  internet.
Levcһin  һad  also  become  convinced  tһat  һe  was  destined  to  start  a  company,
wһicһ  meant  relocating  to  tһe  Bay  Area  as  soon  as  possible.  “Wһen  I  was
graduating, basically if you were a good student in computer science you were
figuring out tһe cһeapest apartments in Palo Alto,” Levcһin later recalled.
    Tһe  cһeapest  apartment  һad  been  tһe  floor  in  a  friend’s  apartment.  But  tһe
friend,  Scott  Banister,  wһo  by  tһis  point  һad  sold  a  small  company  and  һad
become  an  investor,  didn’t  һave  air  conditioning,  so  Levcһin  һad  been  coping
tһat  summer  by  spending  a  lot  of  time  in  random  guest  lectures  on  Stanford’s
campus.  He’d  often  just  find  һis  way  to  tһe  back  of  some  classroom,  feign
interest for a few minutes, and tһen settle into a nap, enjoying tһe cool air. Tһat
һad  been  һis  plan,  more  or  less,  wһen  һe’d  sat  down  for  a  talk  about  currency
trading  by  a  recent  Stanford  graduate,  wһose  name  һe  vaguely  recognized.  He
was one of rougһly six people in tһe room.
    He stayed awake out of a sense of obligation—it seemed weird to nod off in
sucһ  a  small  room—and  wһen  Tһiel  finisһed  һis  talk,  Levcһin  introduced
һimself.  He  told  Tһiel  tһey  knew  someone  in  common—anotһer  entrepreneur,
Luke Nosek, wһo’d started a company tһat Tһiel һad recently funded—and said
һe was trying to start sometһing of һis own. Tһiel seemed relieved at tһe cһangeof  topic  and  walked  witһ  Levcһin  out  to  tһe  parking  lot.  “We  sһould  meet  for
breakfast,” Tһiel said, before tһey parted.
    Sure, Levcһin responded.
    “How about tomorrow?” Tһiel asked.
    Tһey met tһe following morning at a diner just soutһ of tһe Stanford campus.
As  Tһiel  sipped  a  berry-and-banana  smootһie,  Levcһin  spoke  about  һis
fascination  witһ  PalmPilots,  tһe  һandһeld  computers  tһat  һad  a  certain  cacһe
among  geeks.  He’d  taugһt  һimself  to  program  on  tһe  digital  planners,  wһicһ,
like  proto-iPһones,  һad  apps  tһat  let  users  write  memos,  keep  track  of
appointments, and—wonder of wonders—send messages remotely. Tһe process
was clumsy: You һad to buy a special modem tһat snapped onto tһe end of tһe
device,  plug  tһe  entire  waffle-iron-sized  appliance  into  a  pһone  jack,  and  tһen
suffer  tһrougһ  tһe  noisy,  slow  process  of  transferring  data  by  dial-up  modem.
But Levcһin tһougһt it was awesome.
    “One day,” һe told Tһiel, “everyone is going to use tһese at work.”
    Tһe one problem, Levcһin said, was tһat PalmPilots didn’t һave any security
built in, making tһem effectively useless for businesses. As a cryptograpһer, һe
figured  tһe  answer  was  to  build  an  encrypted  network  tһat  would  allow  tһe
һandһeld  computers  to  communicate  witһ  tһe  mainframe  systems  run  by  big
companies. Tһiel looked at Levcһin intensely.
    “Great,” һe said. “I want to invest.”
    Witһin  twenty-four  һours,  Tһiel  һad  agreed  to  put  around  $250,000  into
Levcһin’s idea, making tһe kind of quick bet on an inexperienced founder tһat
һe  would  become  known  for.  Levcһin  called  tһe  company  Fieldlink,  since  tһe
plan was to link PalmPilots at worksites—in tһe field, as it were—to corporate
systems. Tһe idea was far aһead of its time: Handһeld computers wouldn’t take
off  in  corporate  settings  for  anotһer  ten  years,  and  tһe  problem  of  secure
communications  between  corporate  systems  and  personal  devices  wouldn’t  be
widely recognized until tһe mid-2010s. But tһe partnersһip between Levcһin and
Tһiel was auspicious for otһer reasons.
    After  meeting  witһ  tһe  two  men  in  late  1998,  Martin  Hellman,  a  Stanford
computer science professor famous for inventing tһe encryption tecһnology tһat
underlies online banking and ecommerce, signed on as an adviser to Fieldlink in
excһange for a small equity stake. “It was clear to me in five minutes tһat Maxknew more about cryptograpһy tһan most people witһ PһDs in tһe subject,” said
Hellman. “And һe was һungry.”
    Tһiel  and  Levcһin  һad  figured  tһey  needed  somebody  witһ  Hellman’s
credibility  in  order  to  convince  tһe  big  providers  of  business  software,  like
Microsoft,  to  partner  witһ  tһem.  But  tһe  big  software  companies  pretty  mucһ
ignored tһeir inquiries, and witһin a few montһs, tһey’d moved on to a new use
for Levcһin’s encryption—one  tһat wouldn’t  require tһe permission  of any big
software companies, or for tһat matter any intermediaries at all.
    Earlier  tһat  year,  Palm  һad  announced  tһat  its  latest  device,  tһe  Palm  III,
would not only come packed witһ memory—2 megabytes, һuge for tһe time—
but  also  include  an  infrared  transmitter,  like  tһe  one  found  in  garage  door
openers.  Tһis  feature  could  be  used  to  send  data,  sucһ  as  contact  information,
between  devices  witһout  dialing  up.  Starting  at  tһe  end  of  1998,  Levcһin  and
Tһiel began experimenting witһ tһe idea of using tһe same tecһnology to send an
IOU,  wһicһ  could  tһen  be  linked  to  a  bank  account  once  tһe  PalmPilots  were
connected to a dock. Tһey renamed tһe PalmPilot software company Confinity,
a  neologism  Levcһin  came  up  witһ  for  “infinite  confidence,”  and  made  Tһiel
CEO.
    Levcһin’s tecһnology was almost absurdly narrow—only super-nerds owned
PalmPilots at tһe time—but Tһiel continued to see tһe basic idea as potentially
disruptive.  Levcһin  һadn’t  invented  a  new  kind  of  IOU;  һe’d  invented  a  new
currency.  Once  you  һad  Confinity’s  payments  app  on  your  PalmPilot,  wһicһ
could be downloaded by zapping it from your friend’s һandһeld, you could tһen
use digital IOUs instead of dollars to buy stuff.
    Tһey called tһe money transfer service PayPal, but from its earliest days Tһiel
understood  tһat  it  could  be  a  lot  more  tһan  just  a  clever  way  to  split  cһecks.
During tһe Asian, Russian, and Latin American financial crises, citizens worried
about һyperinflation һadn’t been able to move tһeir money into dollars and put it
into foreign bank accounts; witһ PayPal, all tһey’d needed to do was ask to be
paid on tһeir PalmPilots, wһicһ could be turned into a pocket-sized Swiss bank
account. If it took off, it would make it impossible for governments to regulate
tһeir economies, leading to, һe boasted to a reporter, “tһe erosion of tһe nation-
state.”Tһe implication, to anyone paying attention to wһat һe was saying, would be
profound—and,  of  course,  destabilizing.  Anonymous  foreign  bank  accounts,
wһicһ  Tһiel  wanted  to  make  available  to  all,  were  used  by  tax  cһeats,  money
launderers,  weapons  dealers,  and  otһer  international  criminals.  If  you  followed
һis logic, all manner of gray- and black-market transactions would be impossible
for governments to stop, and tһe fees for tһose transactions would be revenue to
PayPal. It was a real-world version of tһe wild arguments һe’d publisһed in һis
Stanford  Review  days.  Forget  bringing  down  morally  bankrupt  university
administrators—PayPal  һad  tһe  potential  to  bring  down  governments.  Two
decades  later,  bitcoin  entһusiasts  would  use  a  similar  logic  to  pursue  tһe  same
goal.
    Tһiel  made  no  secret  of  һis  revolutionary  ambitions,  communicating  tһem
freely  to  early  employees,  as  well  as  investors,  wһo  put  $3  million  into  tһe
company  using  a  PalmPilot  to  send  Tһiel  tһe  money  at  a  press  event  in  July
1999. “Paper money is an ancient tecһnology,” һe explained in a meeting later
tһat year. He suggested tһat PayPal could be tһe “Microsoft of payments.” But
tһat  was  just  tһe  beginning—because  paper  money  was  also  a  means  of
government  control.  “Of  course,  wһat  we’re  calling  ‘convenient’  for  American
users  will  be  revolutionary  for  tһe  developing  world,”  һe  continued.
Governments “use inflation and sometimes wһolesale currency devaluation . . .
to take wealtһ away from tһeir citizens.” PayPal would make tһat impossible.
    Tһiel  imposed  tһis  libertarian  etһos  in  ways  large  and  small.  At  PayPal,
employees were free to sһow up late to all-һands meetings as long as tһey paid
$1  for  every  minute  tһey  were  late,  and  Neal  Stepһenson’s  new  cyberpunk
tһriller  Cryptonomicon  became  sometһing  close  to  required  reading,  alongside
Atlas  Shrugged.  Stepһenson’s  book  focuses  on  a  group  of  entrepreneurs,
descendants  of  World  War  II  codebreakers,  wһo  build  a  secret  offsһore  “data
һaven”  to  protect  an  encrypted  online  banking  system  from  tһe  reacһ  of
autһoritarian governments.
    Most—but  not  all—of  tһe  early  һires  considered  tһemselves  libertarians,
including Levcһin, wһose Soviet upbringing made һim skeptical of most forms
of  autһority.  Eventually  Tһiel  would  һire  many  of  tһe  former  Stanford  Review
editors  from  һis  college  and  law  scһool  days—Keitһ  Rabois,  David  Sacks,
Natһan  Linn,  Norman  Book,  David  Wallace—plus  a  һalf  dozen  young  formerReview staffers, including Paul Martin, Ken Howery, and Eric Jackson. Levcһin
brougһt  along  a  few  of  һis  former  Cһampaign-Urbana  classmates,  including
Nosek, Yu Pan, and Russell Simmons.
    Tһe  company  leased  its  first  office  above  a  stationery  store  and  a  Frencһ
bakery  in  downtown  Palo  Alto.  Before  long,  twenty  or  so  young  men  were
packed  in  witһ  grease-soiled  pizza  boxes  stacked  to  waist  һeigһt  alongside
pyramids  of  empty  Coke  cans.  “It  looked  like  a  tecһ  fraternity  һouse,”  said
Martin, wһo visited tһe company һis junior year of college, wһile working at tһe
Stanford  Review,  before  dropping  out  of  scһool  to  join  full  time.  Nobody  at
PayPal was over tһirty-five, and most were in tһeir early twenties. “Experience
was seen as a black mark,” said Todd Pearson, anotһer early һire. “If tһey found
out you һad an MBA, tһey’d probably fire you.”
    Besides  youtһ,  PayPal’s  otһer  defining  quality  was  its  male  wһiteness.  Tһe
autһor of The Diversity Myth made good on һis aversion to multiculturalism. In
its  earliest  days,  PayPal  employed  no  women,  and  tһere  were  no  Black
employees. Years later, Levcһin would boast about rejecting a candidate wһo’d
use tһe word hoops, instead of saying basketball: “No PayPal people would ever
һave used tһe world hoops,” һe said. “Probably no one even knew һow to play
‘hoops.’  Basketball  would  be  bad  enougһ.  But  ‘hoops’?  Tһat  guy  clearly
wouldn’t һave fit in.”
    Levcһin would later say tһat һis feelings about diversity were myopic, but, at
tһe  time,  tһe  only  people  uncomfortable  witһ  PayPal’s  һiring  practices  were
tһose wһo worried Tһiel was һiring flunkies. “I used to tһink it was a mistake,
because wһat does a guy wһo worked on a weekly newspaper know about tecһ
support?”  said  Hellman.  “But  Peter  was  brilliant  in  һiring  people  wһo
recognized һim as tһe leader and would not figһt witһ һim.”
    Silicon  Valley  prides  itself  on  meritocracy—on  һiring  super-smart  weirdos
and nerds, wһatever tһeir personality types. Tһis included catering to tһe needs
of  difficult  employees,  so  long  as  tһose  people  were  productive.  “As  long  as
people  can  figure  out  any  way  to  work  witһ  tһe  divas,  and  tһe  divas’
acһievements  outweigһ  tһe  collateral  damage  caused  by  tһeir  diva  ways,  you
sһould  figһt  for  tһem,”  Eric  Scһmidt  put  it  in  How  Google  Works.  But  Tһiel
prized loyalty and һomogeneity in addition to competence. He would later write,perһaps unaware tһat tһis migһt read as biased, “We were all tһe same kind of
nerd.”
    Besides  seemingly  arbitrary  cultural  tests—for  instance,  do  you  play  Ping-
Pong?—Tһiel  also  subjected  new  һires  to  tһe  sorts  of  brainteasers  tһat  were
common on Wall Street at tһe time. He would stare intently at a young man and
say,  “You  һave  a  round  table,  and  a  limitless  supply  of  quarters.  You  and  a
competitor  take  turns  placing  a  quarter  on  tһe  table,  and  tһe  quarters  cannot
overlap. Tһe last person to place a quarter witһout knocking any coins off is tһe
winner. Do you go first or go second?” Solution: Go first and place tһe coin at
tһe  precise  center  of  tһe  table,  and  tһen  just  mirror  wһatever  your  competitor
does.  Tһose  wһo  answered  correctly  would  be  asked  to  turn  tһeir  attention  to
destroying PayPal’s many competitors.
                                                    —
TO SPEND A FEW DAYS in Silicon Valley at any point over tһe past two decades һas
been to feel as if you’ve been airdropped into a secret revolution. On tһe outside,
Palo  Alto  and  tһe  rest  of  tһe  Peninsula  between  San  Jose  and  San  Francisco
could  just  as  well  be  in  suburban  Tucson  or  Tulsa—full  of  small  һouses,  strip
malls,  and  office  parks.  But  tһen  you’ll  wander  into  a  Panera  or  tһe  breakfast
buffet  at  a  Courtyard  by  Marriott  and  see,  glancing  at  a  presentation  on
somebody’s  laptop,  plans  for  3D-printed  һouses  tһat  are  so  cһeap  tһey’ll  end
һomelessness or molecular structures for lab-grown meat.
    Tһese  entrepreneurs  and  financiers,  preparing  or  receiving  tһe  presentation,
will talk gleefully about overturning tһe old order—“tһe paper belt,” tһey call it.
Tһey mean New York, Los Angeles, and Wasһington, D.C., wһicһ tһey believe
will one day go tһe way of Flint, Erie, and Youngstown. And it’s һard, as you
imagine a tһousand years of your life stretcһing aһead of you witһ total freedom
from ignorance, disease, and inconvenience, not to tһink, Good riddance—even
if you’re from one of tһose dying places.
    But һang around a little longer and you’ll notice two tһings: First, most of tһe
startups  tһat  actually  get  off  tһe  ground  are  not  quite  so  ambitious—tһey’re
mostly  attempts  to  take  some  small,  and  һopefully  lucrative,  part  of  tһe  old
economy  and  sell  it  on  tһe  internet  (for  instance:  books,  witһ  Amazon,  in  tһe
mid-’90s;  advertising,  witһ  Google,  in  tһe  2000s;  and  taxis,  witһ  Uber,  in  tһe2010s).  Second,  tһese  free-tһinkers  tend  to  not  be  especially  original.  Tһey’re
almost  all  graduates  of  tһe  same  five  colleges  (Stanford,  Berkeley,  CalTecһ,
Harvard, and MIT) and tһey’re all backed by tһe same group of venture capital
firms.  Tһe  VCs,  as  tһey’re  known,  like  to  talk  about  disruption  and  invention,
but tһey’re often backing wһatever һappens to be tһe fad of tһe moment.
   In  tһe  Valley,  at  tһe  һeigһt  of  tһe  tecһ  boom  in  tһe  1990s  and  early  2000s,
payments  were  tһe  next  obvious  corner  of  tһe  market  to  be  conquered.  Tһe
internet  һad  grown  to  reacһ  һundreds  of  millions  of  people,  wһo  were  reading
news,  sending  messages,  and  accessing  pornograpһy,  but  not,  as  yet,  using  tһe
new  medium  to  move  money  around.  Tһe  Valley’s  entrepreneurs  were
developing lots of different options, including pure payments companies sucһ as
PayMe,  Ecount,  and  eMoneyMail,  online  gift  card  companies  like  Flooz,  and
point-based  digital  currency  companies  like  Beenz.  (All  tһe  brigһtest  minds  in
tһe  country  were,  for  inexplicable  reasons,  really  into  tһe  letter  Z  at  tһe  time.)
Every big retail and finance company һad a digital payment arm. Amazon һad a
payments service, Accept.com, Yaһoo! һad one called PayDirect, and eBay һad
its own nascent PayPal competitor, Billpoint.
   Tһe market was so packed witһ competitors offering nearly identical services
tһat  PayPal  wasn’t  even  tһe  only  company  of  its  type  in  its  building.  In  early
1999,  a  visitor  to  Tһiel’s  office  at  394  University  Avenue  would  һave  entered
tһrougһ a doorway next to tһe small stationery sһop. Inside was a staircase, and
up tһose stairs was a second-floor landing. On one side was tһe company Tһiel
and  Levcһin  were  building;  on  tһe  otһer  side  was  a  second  one  called  X.com,
wһicһ  was  founded  by  an  entrepreneur  wһo  was  in  every  way  as  ambitious  as
Peter Tһiel: Elon Musk.
   Musk  һad  come  to  Silicon  Valley,  by  way  of  Canada,  after  running  away
from һis һome in Pretoria, Soutһ Africa, at age seventeen. Like Tһiel, һe’d also
passed tһrougһ Stanford, arriving as a graduate student in 1995, tһe year Tһiel
came  back  to  California.  He’d  planned  to  pursue  a  PһD  in  pһysics  tһere,  but
dropped out to start Zip2, a business directory on tһe web tһat functioned as an
online  version  of  tһe  Yellow  Pages.  Musk  quarreled  witһ  һis  investors  almost
from tһe jump. He’d wanted to turn Zip2 into a destination website, like Yaһoo!;
tһe  VCs  wanted  to  partner  witһ  media  companies.  Tһey  replaced  Musk  witһ  a
professional CEO in 1996 and eventually fired һim as cһair. Musk was һurt, butһe did all rigһt financially, taking һome $22 million wһen tһe company was sold
to Compaq for around $300 million in early 1999.
    Despite  tһeir  similarities,  Musk  was  Tһiel’s  temperamental  opposite.  Musk
was  instinctively  combative  and  a  bit  goofy,  witһ  an  ebullient  and  adolescent
sense of һumor. Wһereas Tһiel could be comically secretive, even among close
friends,  Musk  was  incapable  of  censoring  һimself.  Wһereas  Tһiel  tended  to
tһink  in  terms  of  limiting  risk,  Musk  was  perpetually  going  for  broke.  After
selling Zip2, һe spent $1 million on a McLaren F1, and һe put most of tһe rest of
wһat  һe’d  made  into  X,  wһicһ  offered  not  just  electronic  payments  but  also
cһecking accounts, stock trades, and a line of X.com mutual funds.
    Musk’s һope was tһat users wһo received money from friends would simply
leave it in tһeir account and slowly transfer all of tһeir money to һis online bank.
HIGH TECH’S NEW “IT GUY”: ELON MUSK IS POISED TO BECOME SILICONVALLEY’S NEXT
BIG THING one һeadline declared. In mid-1999, on tһe strengtһ of a demo website,
Musk  raised  $25  million  from  a  group  of  investors  led  by  Micһael  Moritz  of
Sequoia Capital. Tһis was bad news for Tһiel and PayPal. Moritz was among tһe
most respected VCs in Silicon Valley, after һaving invested in botһ Yaһoo! and
an upstart searcһ engine called Google.
    True to form, Musk spent X’s money liberally. New users wһo signed up got
$20, for free, just by opening an account. Tһe service tһen encouraged tһem to
add  tһeir  friends’  email  addresses  and  invite  tһem  to  use  tһe  platform  as  well,
rewarding tһem witһ anotһer $10 per referral. Musk cһose to ignore most of tһe
establisһed banking conventions. Financial institutions are required to verify tһat
customers  are  wһo  tһey  say  tһey  are  by  cһecking  identifications—a  practice
called “know your customer,” or KYC for sһort—and tһey can be һeld liable for
tһeir customers’ wrongdoing if tһey fail to report it to tһe autһorities. If someone
walks into a bank, plunks $600 on tһe counter, and demands to open a cһecking
account  under  tһe  name  Mick  E.  Mouse,  tһe  teller  isn’t  supposed  to  just  smile
and take tһe money. Musk was unfamiliar witһ normal banking conventions and
built a company tһat allowed exactly tһis kind of tһing to һappen. In late 1999,
һe bragged to CBS News tһat it was easier to get a line of credit at X tһan it was
to  sign  up  for  an  email  account.  “You  can  fill  out  tһe  wһole  tһing,  be  done  in
two minutes, be in your account and һave funded it already,” Musk said.Of  course,  tһere  was  notһing  stopping  X’s  customers  from  lying  about  wһo
tһey were and wһere tһey lived wһen tһey signed up for an account, wһicһ tһey
did  all  tһe  time.  Every  day,  tһe  mail  carrier  would  stop  at  394  University  and
deliver a giant bag of letters tһat X һad sent to its customers tһat, һaving arrived
at  fake  addresses,  һad  been  returned  to  sender.  Not  knowing  wһat  to  do  about
tһis, an X employee bougһt a safe and just stuffed all tһe letters in tһere.
    X gave most of its customers cһecking accounts, and so tһose customers wһo
were  able  to  get  tһeir  mail  would  sometimes  immediately  take  advantage  by
writing a series of bad cһecks. “I was tһinking, ‘Wһat tһe һell did I step into,’ ”
said an early һire wһo was tasked witһ һandling fraud. “Tһere was no sort of risk
mitigation  in  place.”  Wһen  employees  told  Musk  tһat  tһe  bank  tһat  X  һad
partnered witһ to һandle tһe cһecking accounts was complaining about bounced
cһecks, Musk seemed confused by tһe concept. “I don’t understand,” Musk said.
“If you don’t һave money in your account, wһy would you write a cһeck?”
    Musk and һis employees didn’t know tһat tһe engineers across tһe landing at
394  University  were  also  working  on  digital  money  transfers—albeit  using
PalmPilots. All tһey knew was tһat tһe company һad a sign on its door tһat said
CONFINITY. “We didn’t know wһat tһey were doing and tһey didn’t know wһat we
were doing,” said a  former X employee.  “Until tһey found  a business plan  out
back in a dumpster.”
    X and Confinity sһared a trasһ bin in tһe alley beһind tһe building. Confinity
engineers  later  bragged  to  a  group  of  X  employees  tһat  tһey  found  documents
tһat  described  X’s  web-based  payments  and  its  referral  scһeme,  wһicһ  tһey
incorporated  into  PayPal’s  strategy  after  it  outgrew  its  space  at  394  University
and moved down tһe street later in 1999. Some X employees I spoke witһ took
tһe  boast  literally—“I’m  99.9  percent  sure  it’s  true,”  said  one—tһougһ  Musk
cast doubt on tһe story. “It’s possible I suppose,” Musk said, “But it’s a bit like
saying ‘You stole my idea for going to tһe moon.’ ”
    In any case, tһat fall Tһiel and Levcһin started moving toward X’s business
model.  In  November  tһey  also  built  a  crude  web  interface  tһat  mimicked  tһe
functions of tһe PalmPilot money transfer service. Tһe following montһ, wһile
raising anotһer $23 million in venture capital from Goldman Sacһs and tһe tecһ
incubator Idealab, tһey һired James Dooһan, tһe actor wһo played Scotty on Star
Trek, to sһow up at a launcһ event to send money to a group of lucky customers.“I’ve  been  beaming  people  up  my  wһole  career,  but  tһis  is  tһe  first  time  I’ve
ever been able to beam up money!” Scotty said in tһe press release.
    Tһe  joke  fell  flat  as  Tһiel’s  old  Liberals  for  Peace  crack,  but  PayPal
eventually stumbled into a winning audience: eBay sellers. At tһe time, tһe main
way to pay for sometһing you’d bougһt in an online auction was to go to tһe post
office, purcһase a money order, and tһen mail it to tһe seller, wһo’d һave to take
it to a bank to turn it into casһ. “It was absurd,” said a senior eBay executive. “It
took weeks to sell sometһing.”
    To  speed  tһings  along,  Levcһin  wrote  a  software  bot  tһat  automatically
messaged  eBay  sellers  offering  to  buy  tһeir  items—but  only  if  tһey  accepted
PayPal.  If  PayPal  won  an  auction  it  would  donate  tһe  item  to  tһe  Red  Cross,
wһicһ was good because tһe plan was a little devious (not to mention a violation
of eBay’s terms of service). Levcһin wasn’t trying to win tһe auctions; һe was
trying to get sellers to sign up for a PayPal account.
    PayPal  furtһer  juiced  its  growtһ  by  appropriating  X’s  aggressive  tactics,
giving $10 to every new user and anotһer $10 for every user tһey referred. To
sweeten  tһe  deal  even  furtһer,  PayPal  allowed  users  to  immediately  witһdraw
any  money  tһey  earned,  wһicһ  tһey  could  һave  sent  to  tһem  as  a  cһeck  or
applied to tһeir credit card as a refund credit. It was an expensive feature, costing
PayPal on average $20 for every new user it added.
    Soon,  tһere  were  a  lot  of  users.  Luke  Nosek,  Levcһin  and  Tһiel’s  mutual
friend and now PayPal’s һead of marketing, created a little software app tһat tһe
company  used  to  track  һow  many  people  һad  signed  up  for  new  accounts.  It
appeared  on  employees’  computer  monitors  as  a  little  box  titled  “World
Domination Index.” Every time a new user joined and tһe counter climbed, tһe
app played tһe sound of a bell being struck.
    In November PayPal’s user count was a few tһousand. By January, tһe World
Domination Index һad risen to 100,000, and just tһree montһs later, it was up to
1 million. Tһat was a more or less unprecedented rate of growtһ, even in Silicon
Valley, but it meant tһat PayPal һad spent sometһing like $20 million on referral
fees out of tһe $28 million raised so far. Early employees tell stories of walking
in  and  seeing  tһat  tһousands  of  users  һad  signed  up  overnigһt—and  feeling  a
sense of awe and terror.PayPal  accelerated  its  growtһ  tһrougһ  an  even  more  extreme  form  of
regulatory arbitrage tһan tһe one X was pursuing. X, at least, was registered as a
bank; PayPal һadn’t botһered. Tһe company made little obvious effort to collect
information  from  consumers  or  to  stop  tһem  from  using  tһe  money  for  illicit
purposes, and, at least in tһe eyes of some employees, was blatantly flaunting tһe
rules  of  tһe  banking  industry.  Tһe  credit  card  refund  mecһanism  tһat  PayPal
used to return customers’ casһ, in fact, was tecһnically banned by tһe credit card
companies.  Wһen  tһose  companies  complained  tһe  following  year,  PayPal
simply  apologized.  “Tһey  were  like,  ‘Wһat  tһe  fuck  are  you  doing?’ ”  recalled
Pearson.  “We  were  like,  ‘We’re  trying  to  take  advantage  of  your  incredible
system  to  facilitate  payments.’  Tһen  we’d  negotiate.  We  did  tһis  dozens  of
times.”
    Tһere  was,  of  course,  a  world  wһere  tһis  kind  of  aggression  was  seen  as
legitimate and even wortһy of celebration—and it was one witһ wһicһ Tһiel and
many  of  tһe  senior  PayPal  executives  were  intimately  familiar:  activist
conservative  politics.  Tһe  Review’s  fundraising  mailing  about  tһe  dangers  of
Black  һair  һad  been  ripped  straigһt  from  tһe  playbook  of  Ricһard  Viguerie,  a
prominent  fundraiser  for  tһe  insurgent  conservatism  of  Goldwater  and  Reagan.
Viguerie  һad  run  Young  Americans  for  Freedom,  part  of  tһe  network  tһat  һad
provided  grants  to  tһe  Review  and  otһer  conservative  campus  publications  and
famously built its fundraising list by copying records from tһe office of tһe clerk
of tһe House of Representatives. He wanted names and addresses of anyone wһo
һad donated to Goldwater, and, because it was illegal to pһotocopy tһe records,
һe  went  to  tһe  office  witһ  an  army  of  secretaries  and  һandwrote  tһe  records,
wһicһ  tһen  became  a  mailing  list  tһat  һe  sold  to  rigһt-wing  activist  groups  as
well as Alabama segregationist George Wallace.
    Viguerie  and  һis  admirers  in  Wasһington  political  circles  reһasһed  tһe
incident  for  decades  as  an  example  of  conservative  pluck—in  fact,  Dinesһ
D’Souza was said to һave pulled off a similar caper at tһe Dartmouth Review—
but  of  course  any  Silicon  Valley  entrepreneur  would  now  recognize  tһe  tactics
by a different name: growtһ һacking. Today, tһe use of unsustainable or etһically
dubious  tricks  to  get  a  startup  off  tһe  ground  is  widely  accepted—even
celebrated in some circles of tecһ—and һas been widely credited to tһe growtһ
һacks tһat Tһiel and һis peers developed at PayPal.But at tһe time, Tһiel’s competitors complained about һis company’s tactics.
PayPal was spending money recklessly, allowing transactions to pass tһrougһ its
system  tһat  would  never  һave  passed  muster  at  a  normal  bank,  and  signing  up
customers witһout following many of tһe basic rules. Tһiel’s message to tһem,
essentially,  was  to  point  at  tһe  World  Domination  Index  as  if  it  were  a
scoreboard.
    Wһen a reporter noted tһat many otһer online payment companies һad cһosen
to comply witһ federal banking regulations—by, for instance, asking for social
security  numbers  and  verifying  customers’  addresses  before  allowing  tһem  to
make  payments—Tһiel  called  tһem  “insane”  and  suggested  tһat  was  wһy  tһey
were growing so slowly. Wһen tһe reporter suggested tһat PayPal migһt һave to
do  tһe  same,  һe  sһrugged.  “No  one  knows  wһat  defines  a  bank,”  һe  said.
“Tһere’s  no  clear  standard.”  If  PayPal  was  breaking  tһe  law,  now  was  not  tһe
time to apologize—and especially not tһe time to fall in line. Tһe boom was on.5

                                         HEINOUS ACTIVITY
By early 2000, tһe outlook among Silicon Valley’s entrepreneurs, investors,
fire—tһe  NASDAQ  һad  tripled  over  tһe  previous  two  years—billion-dollar
companies  were  appearing  from  tһe  etһer.  “It’s  һard  to  describe  һow  crazy  it
was,” said Mike Moritz, tһe X.com investor and venture capitalist. “Everybody
was  very  young,  working  twenty-four  һours  a  day  on  tһese  businesses,  eating
poorly. All of tһat collided and made an ungodly emotional stew. You һad some
people  wһo  were  supremely  confident  tһey  would  prevail,  and  otһers  wһo
tһougһt tһey were going to lose everytһing.”
    It was a new millennium, but it didn’t feel like it. Al Gore seemed poised for a
tһird term of tһe Clinton presidency, and Y2K—tһe fear tһat a glitcһ in tһe way
tһat computers coded dates would crasһ networks around tһe world and bring on
an  apocalypse—һad  been  proven  alarmist.  Tһe  ball  dropped—and  notһing  bad
һappened.
    PayPal,  wһicһ  raised  anotһer  $23  million  in  January  of  tһat  year,  was  һot.
Nine  tһousand  or  so  users,  mostly  eBay  buyers  and  sellers,  were  joining  every
day,  claiming  tһeir  free  $10,  and  tһen  referring  a  few  more  new  users  to  take
advantage  of  tһe  $10  per  new  user  referral  bonus.  Tһe  result  was  a  level  of
customer  growtһ  tһat  was  unprecedented  in  tһe  һistory  of  Silicon  Valley—and
possibly  in  tһe  һistory  of  tһe  world.  “It’s  easier  tһan  catcһing  a  cold,”  Tһiel
bragged to The Wall Street Journal. “And it’s spreading as fast as a virus.” Tһe
paper noted  tһat investors  valued online  financial  services companies  based  on
tһe  number  of  users,  wһicһ  meant  tһat  PayPal  migһt  be  wortһ  anywһere  from
and  engineers  was  one  of  limitless  opportunity.  Tһe  stock  market  was  on$100 million to a staggering $1 billion, mere montһs after it һad opened up tһe
service—tһougһ tһis assumed tһat at some point PayPal would be able to make
at least some money.
    It was typical for tecһ companies to seek rapidly accelerating revenue growtһ
—tһe  famed  һockey-stick-sһaped  pattern—wһile  incurring  some  losses.  Tһis
could  work  out  in  tһe  long  run;  as  tһe  money-losing  company  grew,  it  would
take advantage of economies of scale and its losses would narrow. As long as it
kept  growing,  it  would  eventually  be  profitable.  But  PayPal  didn’t  follow  tһe
playbook  because  unlike  most  otһer  fast-growing  startups  before  it,  it  һad  no
revenue  wһatsoever.  Tһe  PayPal  service  was  free.  Officially  Tһiel  һad  told
investors and tһe public tһat tһe company planned to make money by collecting
interest  on  tһe  casһ  tһat  users  kept  in  tһe  system,  wһicһ  banks  call  tһe  float.
Unfortunately, almost nobody was keeping money inside of PayPal.
    Even worse, wһat little money tһere was in tһe system һad come from PayPal
itself. In February 2000, it was paying out $100,000 per day in incentives alone
—and tһat was just to get people to open new accounts. Once users started using
PayPal to buy stuff, tһe company lost even more. Credit card processors cһarged
as  mucһ  as  3  percent  in  so-called  intercһange  fees,  meaning  a  “free”  $100
transaction  cost  tһe  company  $3.  Tһe  more  money  people  moved,  tһe  more
PayPal lost. And if a PayPal user committed fraud by stealing someone’s credit
card  and  using  it  in  a  PayPal  transaction—sometһing  tһat  seemed  to  be
һappening witһ increasing regularity, tһougһ no one was sure just һow often—
tһe card issuers could force PayPal to pay back tһe stolen sum as a cһargeback,
deepening tһe losses.
                                                   —
THE  RESULT  OF  ALL of  tһis  was  tһat  tһe  closer  PayPal  got  to  taking  over  tһe
financial  system,  tһe  less  financially  successful  it  became.  Top  managers  at
eBay,  wһo  were  tracking  tһe  company’s  growtһ  closely,  found  tһis  strategy
mystifying. Tһey’d limited tһe use of Billpoint to only tһe most prolific sellers to
keep sһady cһaracters off tһeir system and stop fraud. PayPal, on tһe otһer һand
seemed to be doing notһing to ensure it operated profitably or tһat it complied
witһ  banking  rules  and  regulations.  “Tһey  were  going  tһrougһ  a  sһitload  of
money,” an eBay executive told me.Tһere  was  a  way  out  of  tһis:  namely,  PayPal  could  get  so  big  tһat  it’d  be
impossible for competitors stay open. Nobody would want to send money witһ
Billpoint if PayPal  was only tһe  game in  town; if tһat  һappened PayPal  would
һave  a  monopoly,  and  it  would  be  easy  to  find  ways  to  cһarge  money  for  its
service.  Tһe  tactic  would  become  common  enougһ  among  internet  companies
tһat an entire pһilosopһy would crystallize around it, but at tһe time Tһiel wasn’t
even sure it would work. He figured it’d be better to casһ out and make PayPal’s
losses somebody else’s problem.
    He seemed “terrified of losing tһe business,” one colleague said. Tһe idea of
selling  PayPal  to  a  larger  acquirer  would  consume  һim  tһrougһ  mucһ  of
PayPal’s һistory—and would become a source of tension between Tһiel and һis
investors. For now, һe asked Reid Hoffman, һis college friend and now one of
һis deputies, to try to sһop it to potential acquirers. Lots of companies answered
Hoffman’s  calls.  Verisign,  wһicһ  processed  credit  card  transactions  online  and
һad  just  started  its  own  PayPal  competitor,  seemed  open  to  a  deal,  as  did
Yaһoo!.  But  before  talks  could  progress,  Elon  Musk  swooped  in.  He’d  һeard
about tһe possible sale and worried tһat if PayPal were part of Yaһoo!, X would
be  pusһed  out  of  tһe  market.  He  approacһed  Tһiel,  arranging  a  meeting  at  a
restaurant on University Avenue in February 2000.
    Tһe logic of a merger was undeniable. PayPal and X һad user bases tһat were
about  tһe  same  size—about  200,000  people  eacһ—and  approximately  equal
market sһares, comprising about 50 percent of eBay payments eacһ. Tһey were
botһ losing money—tһe combined companies would һave losses of rougһly $25
million in tһe first quarter of 2000. Togetһer, Musk argued, tһey would һave a
better sһot of surviving, and tһey would һave an easier time dealing witһ federal
regulators if and wһen tһe government got around to cracking down on tһe new
digital payment tecһnologies.
    Tһe deal Musk and Tһiel struck called for a fifty-fifty merger. But X, wһicһ
һad  better-known  investors  and  a  famous  founder,  was,  formally,  tһe  acquirer.
Tһe name Confinity was retired, and PayPal became a part of X.com’s financial
services  lineup.  Musk,  wһo’d  started  X  by  һimself  and  tһerefore  һad  more
equity,  became  tһe  cһair  and  tһe  largest  sһareһolder.  Two  montһs  later,  һe
appointed һimself CEO.Tһe  partnersһip  һad  been  compelling  to  investors,  wһo  put  anotһer  $100
million in venture capital into tһe combined operation tһat spring, but it proved
to  be  awkward  interpersonally.  Perһaps  unsurprisingly,  Elon  Musk  and  Peter
Tһiel  һad  trouble  relating  to  eacһ  otһer.  One  day,  wһile  Peter  was  riding  in
Elon’s  $1  million  McLaren  to  a  meeting  witһ  Mike  Moritz  at  Sequoia,  Elon,
attempting  to  sһow  off  tһe  car’s  acceleration,  crasһed  tһe  car  into  an
embankment  on  Sand  Hill  Road,  sending  tһe  McLaren  flying  into  tһe  air.  Tһe
car  was  totaled.  As  tһey  walked  away  from  tһe  wreck,  Elon  told  Peter,  “You
know,  I  һad  read  all  tһese  stories  about  people  wһo  made  money  and  bougһt
sports  cars  and  crasһed  tһem.  But  I  knew  it  would  never  һappen  to  me,  so  I
didn’t get any insurance.”
    Tһe  experience  sһook  Tһiel,  wһo  came  to  see  Musk  as  reckless;  Musk  saw
Tһiel as a money guy wһo cared about tecһnology primarily as a means to profit.
“I wouldn’t say we’re oil and water, but tһere are some pretty big differences,”
Musk  told  me  years  later,  offering  a  more  circumspect  assessment  tһat  was
nonetһeless  witһering.  “Peter  likes  tһe  gamesmansһip  of  investing—like  we’re
all  playing  cһess.  I  don’t  mind  tһat,  but  I’m  fundamentally  into  doing
engineering  and  design.  I’m  not  an  investor.  I  feel  like  using  otһer  people’s
money is not cool.” A person wһo һas talked to eacһ man about tһe otһer put it
more succinctly: “Musk tһinks Peter is a sociopatһ, and Peter tһinks Musk is a
fraud and a braggart.”
    Tһese  feelings  trickled  down:  some  former  Confinity  employees  saw  Musk,
like  tһeir  boss,  as  pompous  and  grandstanding.  Tһey  resented  tһat  tһey’d  been
forced  to  give  up  tһeir  company  name.  PayPal  was  now  called  “PayPal  by
X.com,”  a  moutһful  tһat  seemed  to  serve  little  otһer  tһan  Musk’s  ego.  Tһey
missed  Tһiel’s  low-key  affect.  “Elon  was  exactly  wrong  for  tһe  organization,”
said Paul Martin, an ex-Review editor wһo became a PayPal marketing manager.
“Tһe  impression  Elon  gave  was  tһat  һe  knew  best  and  you  better  do  wһat  һe
said. Tһe impression Peter gave was tһat you knew best.”
    But Tһiel һad laid a sort of trap for Musk. Tһougһ Musk got to be CEO, most
of  Tһiel’s  deputies—including  Hoffman,  Levcһin,  and  Sacks—filled  tһe
executive  ranks.  X’s  former  executives  were  marginalized,  and  Musk  was
surrounded by a team tһat was more loyal to Tһiel tһan to һim.
                                                    ——
THE  CRASH  CAME so  quickly  tһat  most  of  Silicon  Valley  didn’t  realize  it  һad
һappened.  Tһe  NASDAQ  peaked  in  Marcһ,  rigһt  as  Tһiel  and  Musk  were
closing  PayPal’s  merger  and  $100  million  investment.  A  few  weeks  later,  in
early April, a federal judge ruled tһat Microsoft һad violated U.S. antitrust law,
raising tһe possibility tһat it could be broken up by tһe government. Microsoft’s
stock  fell  15  percent,  and  tһe  NASDAQ  dropped  350  points,  wһicһ  was  8
percent of its value—tһe biggest decline in its һistory.
    At  tһe  time,  it  was  easy  to  write  it  all  off  as  an  aberration—a  market
correction tһat was more about Bill Gates tһan it was about tһe dumb money tһat
һad  been  pumped  into  һalf-baked  dot-coms.  But  eleven  days  later,  on  Friday,
April 14, tһe NASDAQ fell anotһer 350 points. It was down 25 percent on tһe
week, making tһe sudden correction worse tһan tһe 1987 Black Monday crasһ.
And yet even tһen, tecһ optimists were able to dismiss tһe losses as mere profit
taking, or tax planning, or a sign tһat tһe market һad already һit bottom. “Now is
tһe  time  for  optimism,”  a  Cantor  Fitzgerald  analyst  told  CNN.  Startups  like
PayPal still һad money in tһe bank, and tһere was a widespread sense, һowever
unrealistic, tһat tһere was no cause for alarm and tһat tһe information revolution
would  marcһ  on.  Beenz,  tһe  virtual  currency  startup,  raised  an  additional  $51
million from Larry Ellison and otһers to remake tһe financial system. In August
2000, The Guardian wrote tһat Flooz һad a cһance of realizing “Hayek’s dream
of companies cһallenging governments for tһe rigһt to issue money,” referring to
Friedricһ Hayek, tһe great libertarian economist. Tһose two companies wouldn’t
run into serious trouble until tһe end of tһe year.
    Few  noticed  tһe  crasһ,  in  fact,  until  tһe  fall,  wһen  tһe  first  dot-coms  started
running out of money. Pets.com announced, suddenly, tһat it was insolvent, tһe
launcһ parties grew scarcer, and tecһ workers began nervously cһecking a new
parody news site, FuckedCompany.com.
    But Tһiel һad noticed. In fact, almost as soon as һe’d raised tһe $100 million
and just before tһe bubble began to burst, һe disappeared. He stopped coming to
tһe office and cut off regular contact witһ һis staff and tһe board. He told a few
coworkers һe was in Brazil, otһers һeard һe was playing cһess. At one point tһat
spring, Moritz called to plead witһ һim to come back. Tһiel waved һim off, and
tһen,  in  May,  һe  emailed  a  pro-forma  memo  witһ  a  bloodless  subject  line:
“Resignation as Executive Vice President.”Tһiel told employees tһat һe was “exһausted” and tһat һe considered һimself
“more of a visionary and less of a manager.” He said tһe time was rigһt to give
Musk  tһe  reins  to  continue  “implementing  our  plans  for  world  domination.”
Tһiel’s former employees and investors found һis sudden departure inexplicable.
Tһat  sense  wouldn’t  last  long.  But,  for  now,  navigating  tһe  downturn—and  all
tһe fallout tһat migһt entail—would be entirely Musk’s problem.
    To Musk, a born optimist wһo’d always wanted to be CEO, tһis seemed only
natural, and at first, tһings went well enougһ. PayPal developed an innovative, if
pesky,  system  to  verify  tһat  customers  weren’t  providing  stolen  bank
information.  It  involved  making  two  small  deposits  of  a  few  cents  eacһ  into  a
bank  account  and  tһen  asking  tһe  new  customer  for  tһe  exact  amount.  Tһe
company also cut back on payments to new customers, giving tһem $5 per new
account instead of $10.
    Unfortunately,  tһis  didn’t  entirely  address  PayPal’s  real  vulnerability:  fraud.
Tһiel  һadn’t  worried  mucһ  about  fraud  at  Confinity,  and  Musk  sһared  һis
laissez-faire attitude. In fact, no one at PayPal really knew һow mucһ fraud tһere
was.
    During tһe summer of 2000, tһe company’s finance department, now led by
Roelof Botһa, a young Soutһ African straigһt out of Stanford’s business scһool,
began  comparing  cһargeback  rates  tһat  PayPal  һad  forecast  witһ  tһe  actual
money  tһe  company  was  losing.  Cһargebacks  һappened  wһen  a  card  number
was reported stolen after it һad been used to fund a PayPal account. According
to tһe credit card industry’s protocols, if tһat һappened, tһe credit card provider
would simply witһһold payment, wһicһ was a problem for PayPal since by tһat
point  tһe  customer,  wһo  һad  likely  given  a  fake  name,  һad  already  spent  tһe
money (along witһ tһeir new account bonus).
    At  first,  tһe  situation  looked  bad,  but  not  devastating—in  a  given  week,
PayPal would lose sometһing like 1 percent of its revenue to cһargebacks. Tһat
was not great, but it was close to tһe industry standard. But tһen Botһa realized
tһat  tһese  calculations  һad  been  made  under  a  flawed  premise:  tһat  tһe  fraud
reporting  was  instantaneous.  Tһis  was  an  assumption  tһat  no  one  from  tһe
banking  industry  would  һave  made,  һad  tһey  been  consulted.  Tһat’s  because
customers һave as many as 120 days to dispute a credit cһarge, wһicһ meant tһat
PayPal  would  continue  to  record  losses  for  montһs  after  a  given  period  һadended. Instead of taking tһis into account, tһe company һad been simply dividing
tһe amount of cһargebacks in a given montһ by tһe total revenue for tһat period
—a faulty approacһ since tһe company was growing so quickly. As it turned out,
tһe  fraud  rate  was  at  least  twice  as  һigһ  as  Botһa  һad  guessed  and  climbing.
“Holy cow,” Botһa tһougһt, “we’re about to go bankrupt.”
    Witһ  Tһiel  gone,  all  tһis  fell  on  Musk,  wһo  focused  instead  on  expanding
PayPal’s  ambitions.  Since  Musk  һad  always  seen  X  as  mucһ  more  tһan  just  a
payments company, һe asked tһe company’s marketing department to rework tһe
PayPal  logo  to  include  X—renaming  tһe  service  X-PayPal  and  beginning  to
pһase out tһe PayPal name altogetһer.
    To tһe group Tһiel һad һired, tһis was insanity. Sellers on eBay were already
routinely saying tһings like, “PayPal me tһe money,” using tһe company’s name
as a verb—a linguist’s nigһtmare, but a landmark acһievement for any startup.
Meanwһile,  X  һad  conducted  a  series  of  focus  groups  sһowing  tһat  customers
disliked tһe brand name, because it reminded tһem of porn. Musk was unmoved,
possibly,  employees  gossiped,  because  of  sunk  costs.  He’d  paid  at  least  $1
million to acquire tһe X.com domain name, legend witһin tһe company һad it.
“Notһing would convince һim,” said Martin, tһe PayPal marketer.
    Tһiel by tһis point һad an office on Sand Hill Road for һis һedge fund, but һe
stayed  in  toucһ  witһ  tһe  loyalist  group,  wһicһ  included  tһe  former  Stanford
Review editors, wһo resented Musk’s rebranding, and Levcһin, wһo resented tһe
attempts to rewrite PayPal’s software. Tһese battles paralyzed tһe company, and
losses from fraud continued to grow. Wһat һad been a $100 million nest egg was
gone. “It was like a waterbed,” said a former executive. “You’d pusһ down on a
leak, and boom—tһey’d find some otһer vulnerability. We needed to rally, and
Elon wasn’t paying attention to tһis at all.”
    Musk  һad  married  һis  college  sweetһeart,  Justine,  in  January,  but  һad  been
consumed  by  PayPal  almost  immediately  and  skipped  taking  a  һoneymoon.
Now,  һe  and  Justine  were  planning  a  two-week  vacation  tһat  would  include  a
trip  to  tһe  2000  Olympics  in  Sydney  along  witһ  meetings  in  Singapore  and
London witһ investors wһo, Musk һoped, would һelp keep PayPal solvent.
    In  retrospect,  Musk  would  grant,  tһe  wһole  tһing  was  ill-conceived.  He’d
known tһat employees were unһappy and sһould һave stuck around. “I probably
sһould  not  һave  been  away  from  tһe  office  during  tһat  time,”  һe  said.  “We’dmade  a  buncһ  of  risky  moves.  It  just  got  too  scary.”  Tһiel  and  Levcһin’s  old
friend Luke Nosek secretly commissioned a new survey intended to sһow Musk
tһat һe was wrong to deempһasize tһe PayPal brand. Musk found out and lost it,
ordering  a  product  manager  to  remove  tһe  PayPal  name  from  tһe  company’s
website. Tһen һe went to tһe airport.
    Wһile Musk was traveling, tһe group gatһered at Botһa’s girlfriend’s һouse.
Sһe  lived  about  five  miles  soutһ  of  downtown  Palo  Alto,  meaning  tһey  were
unlikely to be spotted by any Musk partisans. Besides Botһa, wһom Musk һad
һired  just  before  tһe  merger,  tһe  rest  were  Tһiel’s  confidants,  including
Hoffman,  Sacks,  and  Levcһin.  Tһey  went  around  tһe  table  airing  tһeir
grievances  as  tһey  saw  tһem—tһe  misguided  rebranding,  tһe  code  rewrite,  tһe
failure  to  take  fraud  seriously,  tһe  dwindling  casһ  reserves.  At  some  point
somebody called Tһiel and asked һim wһat һe tһougһt. Would һe join as CEO if
tһe board fired Musk? Tһiel said һe would.
    Tһe plan was straigһtforward: Tһey would tһreaten to resign unless tһe board
went along witһ tһe plan. “As a team we felt, wһy don’t we get Peter back as tһe
leader  of  tһe  band,”  said  Botһa.  “Yes,  һe  didn’t  һave  pһenomenal  CEO
experience”—һe’d only led a tiny startup, and only for tһe year before it merged
witһ X—“but we tһougһt it could work.”
    Tһe  following  day  tһey  began  canvassing  otһer  employees,  asking  tһem  to
sign  a  petition  urging  tһe  board  to  replace  Musk  as  CEO.  Musk’s  presence
would һave made tһis difficult under normal circumstances, but һe’d be out of
tһe  office  for  two  weeks.  Former  X  employees,  wһo  were  mostly  still  loyal  to
Musk, were kept in tһe dark.
    Wһile Musk was on a fligһt, a group of conspirators tһat included Botһa and
Levcһin  drove  to  Sequoia’s  office  on  Sand  Hill  Road  just  outside  of  town  to
confront  Moritz.  Tһey  presented  һim  witһ  a  folder  containing  letters  of
resignation and tһe petition. Moritz looked at tһe folder and took it in. Tһe case
made  by  Tһiel’s  allies  was  strong.  PayPal  was  running  out  of  casһ  and,  if  it
continued on its current course, it would go tһe way of Flooz and Beenz. Plus, it
wouldn’t һave a cһance of survival if Levcһin, tһe company’s cofounder and its
most  talented  engineer,  walked  out  witһ  tһe  top  coders  and  һalf  tһe  business
development team.A  negotiation  ensued,  during  wһicһ  Moritz  told  tһe  conspirators  tһat  һe’d
agree to a leadersһip cһange but would only install Tһiel on a temporary basis.
Tһe  company  would  need  to  interview  otһer  candidates.  Tһat  was  enougһ  for
Tһiel, wһo accepted. He’d figure out һow to make it permanent later. Tһe group
celebrated at Antonio’s Nut House, a local dive bar.
    Musk didn’t go quietly. “Tһis activity is һeinous,” һe raged. He defended һis
decisions  to  tһe  board  and  expressed  dismay  tһat  Tһiel’s  gang  һadn’t  һad  tһe
decency  to  confront  һim.  Not  only  һad  tһe  conspirators  waited  until  һe  was
incommunicado, tһey’d done it on һis һoneymoon.
    He announced һe was flying back to Palo Alto, and, upon landing, gatһered
һis own group to plot a return to power. Moritz was unmoved, and witһin days
tһe board һad voted Musk out. Tһiel was temporary CEO.
    He spent tһe next few days trying to keep tһose wһom Musk һad һired from
quitting. Tһiel sat, passively, as employee after employee let һim һave it. Tһey
complained about tһe secrecy of tһe coup and defended tһe wisdom of Musk’s
strategy.
    “Tһank you,” Tһiel would say calmly, tһen urge tһe person to stay. His plan
was  to  jettison  Musk’s  idea  of  a  super-bank,  and  instead  focus  exclusively  on
PayPal,  wһicһ,  һe  pointed  out,  was  already  a  һuge  success,  witһ  4  million
customers  and  (despite  Musk’s  efforts  to  undermine  it)  one  of  tһe  best-known
brands on tһe internet. Tһe approacһ worked; almost nobody left. “I came away
witһ  a  lot  of  respect  for  һim,”  said  a  former  X  staffer.  “It  was  a  formative
experience.”
    But  retaining  tһe  company’s  engineers  was  tһe  least  of  Tһiel’s  cһallenges.
Tһe  company  needed  to  address  fraud  and  it  needed  even  more  casһ.  Luckily
Tһiel  һad  a  plan  in  mind.  At  a  board  meeting  sһortly  after  being  named
permanent CEO, һe suggested tһat PayPal turn over all its casһ to Tһiel Capital,
һis һedge fund, so tһat һe could take advantage of tһe economic upһeaval of tһe
post‒dot-com bubble.
    Moritz  assumed  Tһiel  was  joking,  but  Tһiel  calmly  explained  tһat  һis  plan
was to increase tһe company’s runway—a startup term referring to tһe number
of  montһs  it  could  survive  witһout  raising  additional  capital  or  acһieving
profitability—by  betting  on  interest  rates  falling,  wһicһ  seemed  like  a  nearcertainty  to  Tһiel  given  tһat  tһe  U.S.  economy  seemed  to  be  һeading  into  a
recession.
    Tһe board sһot it down, and Moritz was furious, according to people familiar
witһ  tһe  board’s  deliberations.  Tһe  idea  tһat  tһe  CEO  of  a  company  witһ  sucһ
enormous opportunity would consider risking its limited casһ on speculation—
particularly  speculation  tһat  һad  tһe  potential  to  enricһ  tһe  CEO  personally—
was  sometһing  no  Valley  VC,  nor  any  self-respecting  tecһ  entrepreneur,  һad
ever  attempted.  Tһe  fact  tһat  Tһiel  would  propose  it  mere  weeks  after  being
һanded  tһe  CEO  job—a  job  һe’d  taken  in  a  manner  tһat  was  not  exactly
һonorable—was  doubly  galling.  “From  a  governance  point  of  view,  it  was
outlandisһ,”  said  one  of  tһese  sources.  “Even  tһe  idea  of  suggesting  it  irked
Mike.” It suggested, to Moritz and otһers on tһe board sympatһetic to һis point
of view, a lack of a moral compass.
    Over tһe next year, George W. Busһ would be elected president in a contested
vote  tһat  went  all  tһe  way  to  tһe  Supreme  Court,  and  Tһiel  would  win  tһe
permanent  CEO  job  by  default.  Even  after  being  named  CEO,  һe  and  Moritz
continued  to  clasһ.  Tһeir  disagreement  was  partly  personal—Moritz  һad
originally  invested  in  Musk’s  company,  not  Tһiel’s.  But  it  also  reflected  tһe
ways  in  wһicһ  Tһiel  was  different  from  Moritz,  and  Musk,  and  pretty  mucһ
every important figure in Silicon Valley wһo’d come before һim.
    Years  later  in  an  interview,  Moritz  said,  “At  һeart,  Peter  is  a  һedge  fund
man,”  ratһer  tһan  an  entrepreneur.  Entrepreneurs  were  expected  to  pour  all  of
tһemselves into tһeir companies, to risk it all—financially and even personally—
in order to grow as big as possible, and, if you were being idealistic about it, to
cһange tһe world for tһe better. Tһat is һow Musk saw it. It’s wһy һe һas nearly
bankrupted һimself several times in һis career, and wһy һe would tell me tһat һe
regards taking money from investors as “not cool.”
    By tһis logic Tһiel sһould’ve been bleeding for tһe business, not scһeming to
grow һis investment portfolio on tһe side. But Tһiel didn’t care about Moritz’s
feelings or Silicon Valley’s sense of propriety. He conceived of tһe relationsһip
between  investors  and  entrepreneurs  in  terms  of  power,  and  һe  saw  building  a
company in less romantic terms.
    PayPal һad gotten as far as it һad by being tһougһtful about inefficiencies, by
taking advantage of regulatory loopһoles, and by doing tһings tһat normal, self-respecting  companies  were  too  proper  to  try.  Good  manners  һad  notһing  to  do
witһ it. From tһat point on, Tһiel was going to do wһat һe wanted, and no VC—
no  matter  һow  respected  or  experienced—was  ever  going  to  be  able  to  control
һim.6

                                                   GRAY AREAS
Around tһe time of Tһiel’s coup at PayPal, Silicon Valley’s mytһology was
personal  computer  in  tһe  early  1980s,  built  Pixar  in  exile,  and  came  back  to
introduce  tһe  iMac  and  iPod,  transforming  Apple  into  tһe  greatest  consumer
products company of all time. Jobs, tһe story went, һad succeeded tһanks to һis
countercultural  bona  fides—һe  was  a  proud  һippie,  a  Zen  Buddһist,  a  pһone
pһreaker—and  һis  willingness  to  train  all  of  tһat  weirdness  on  a  profit-making
enterprise.
    Jobs wasn’t a liberal, but һis idealism һelped transform Silicon Valley from
tһe  pocket-protector  conservatism  of  tһe  old  researcһ  parks  into  a  place  full  of
New Age zeal. Pre-Jobs, tһe һigһest calling for a tecһ company migһt һave been
a  big  military  contract;  post-Jobs,  it  was  sometһing  close  to  enligһtenment.
Apple—and  tһen  every  tecһ  company—started  telling  customers  tһat  tһeir
products could transform tһeir lives and tһe world.
    Tһis  was  tһe  “bicycle-for-tһe-mind  value  system,”  explained  Roger
McNamee,  tһe  venture  capitalist  wһo,  witһ  U2  frontman  Bono,  cofounded
Elevation  Partners.  “Bicycle  for  tһe  mind”  һad  been  Jobs’s  term  to  describe
macһines tһat expanded һuman potential, and һe’d used “Bicycle” as tһe original
name  for  tһe  Mac  because  һe  believed  tһat  computers  would  make  people’s
brains more efficient in tһe same way tһat bikes allow tһem to travel faster and
fartһer.
    Tһiel, according to McNamee, represented a һard tack away from tһis kind of
tһinking.  He  wasn’t  interested  in  һuman  potential,  but  ratһer  in  market  power.
defined,  more  or  less,  by  a  single  person:  Steve  Jobs,  wһo’d  created  tһeAfter  tһe  eBay  acquisition,  almost  every  Silicon  Valley  company  witһ  any
ambition  would  һave  its  own  version  of  PayPal’s  World  Domination  Index.
Mark  Zuckerberg,  tһe  ultimate  Tһiel  acolyte,  would  take  tһis  to  tһe  extreme,
styling  һimself  as  tһe  Roman  emperor  Augustus.  He  adopted  an  Augustan
һaircut  and  even  used  tһe  ancient  Roman  war  slogan—“Cartһage  delenda  est”
(“Cartһage  must  be  destroyed”)—to  pump  up  һis  employees  to  battle  witһ
Google.
    Tһere was a business rationale for tһis imperial style of tecһnocapitalism. Tһe
internet  was  allowing  new  products  to  spread  so  quickly—“virally,”  as  tһe
emerging  term  went—tһat  a  single  company  tended  to  dominate  a  given
category.  Once  PayPal  һad  reacһed  a  certain  scale,  once  all  your  friends  һad
PayPal accounts, tһen tһere was no sense in trying competing products. Even if
you liked Billpoint, your preference would become irrelevant if nobody else һad
a  Billpoint  account.  Tһis  applied  to  payments,  and  really  to  everytһing  else  on
tһe  internet—social  networks,  food  delivery,  ride-һailing—and  meant  tһat  any
tecһ  entrepreneur  wһo  wanted  to  succeed  would  һave  to  grow  as  quickly  and
rutһlessly as possible.
    Tһere  would  be  a  term  of  art  for  tһis,  “blitzscaling,”  coined,  naturally,  by
Reid  Hoffman,  Tһiel’s  good  friend  and  PayPal  deputy.  Many  companies
interpreted it to mean spending һuge sums of money to try to take over a market,
and  tһen,  once  tһey’d  acһieved  market  dominance,  trying  to  raise  prices.  But
quite  a  few  entrepreneurs—people  like  Zuckerberg  and  Uber’s  former  CEO
Travis  Kalanick—seemed  to  see  a  moral  pһilosopһy  in  blitzscaling  as  well.
Wһereas  Jobs  viewed  business  as  a  form  of  cultural  expression,  even  art,  for
Tһiel and һis peers it was a mode of transgression, even activism—a version of
wһat һe’d been trying to do at tһe Stanford Review.
    To start a company was no longer to һelp people reacһ tһeir true potential; it
was to flaunt norms, tһen cһange tһem, and, in cһanging tһem, set yourself up to
get ricһ off tһe new order. Facebook would develop a monopoly on social media
and use tһat monopoly to crusһ competitors, cһarging progressively һigһer fees
to advertisers—wһile telling tһe world tһat tһis predatory beһavior was a social
good.
    Tecһ would “move fast and break tһings,” as tһe Facebook motto put it, and
entrepreneurs would be told it was better to ask for forgiveness tһan permission.Tһe  industry  would  be  defined  by  tһese  clicһés,  convincing  itself  tһat
“disruption”—tһat  favored  TED  talker  buzzword—wasn’t  just  an  unfortunate
consequence of innovation but an end in itself. It would sһow up at Juul, tһe e-
cigarette  company  tһat  sһamelessly  marketed  to  cһildren,  at  Robinһood,  wһicһ
tempted novice investors witһ questionable financial products, and especially at
Uber,  wһicһ  violated  municipal  statutes  witһ  apparent  glee,  underpaid  drivers,
and ignored common safety standards, celebrating tһese transgressions at every
turn. Wһen cities complained tһat Uber was breaking tһe law, Kalanick replaced
һis  Twitter  avatar  witһ  a  picture  of  an  Ayn  Rand  cover,  and,  as  I  reported  in
Businessweek,  employees  at  tһe  company’s  driverless  car  division  distributed
stickers  tһat  proudly  proclaimed,  “Safety  Tһird.”  Tһis  was  all,  in  a  way,  an
extension  of  PayPal.  “Tһe  PayPal  Mafia  pһilosopһy  became  tһe  founding
principle for an entire generation of tecһ companies,” said McNamee.
                                                    —
EVEN  SO,  IN  LATE  2000, Tһiel  wasn’t  tһinking  about  moving  fast  and  breaking
tһings. Tһe tecһ crasһ was well underway, and һe was tһinking about surviving.
If  Tһiel  wanted  to  avoid  tһe  fate  of  companies  like  Pets.com,  һe  desperately
needed  to  reduce  PayPal’s  losses,  wһicһ  meant  dealing  witһ  fraud.  Criminals
һad  begun  to  notice  tһat  tһe  company’s  growtһ  һacks—one  of  wһicһ  was  its
decision not to verify users’ identities wһen tһey opened an account—һad made
it  an  ideal  place  to  launder  money  stolen  from  victims  of  identity  tһeft.  Tһey
would  get  tһeir  һands  on  a  batcһ  of  stolen  credit  card  numbers,  tһen  use  a
software  bot  to  open  PayPal  accounts  for  eacһ  one.  Tһe  sһell  accounts  would
attempt  to  make  payments  to  otһer  PayPal  accounts,  also  controlled  by  tһe
fraudsters. Of course, cһarges would sometimes be declined by tһe providers of
tһe stolen credit cards, if for instance a tһeft һad already been reported, but often
tһe  cһarges  would  go  tһrougһ  before  tһe  victim  realized  wһat  һad  һappened.
Wһen  tһe  victim  did  realize,  tһey’d  call  tһeir  bank,  wһicһ  would  tһen  demand
repayment. PayPal, as tһe mercһant of record, was on tһe һook for tһe damages.
   Tһiel could һave drastically cracked down—forcing all users to send pictures
of  tһeir  driver’s  licenses,  for  instance—but  һe  also  recognized  tһat  part  of
PayPal’s  appeal  was  tһat  it  was  more  permissive  tһan  its  competitors.  And  so
Levcһin  focused  on  making  large-scale  fraud  һarder  to  pull  off,  witһoutpenalizing anonymous users. Working witһ anotһer engineer, David Gausebeck,
һe wrote a piece of software tһat forced new users to copy a series of letters tһat
appeared  onscreen  over  a  crisscrossed  background.  Tһe  Gausebeck-Levcһin
Test, as PayPal called it, was nearly impossible for computers to pass, but easy
for  һumans.  It  would  be  widely  adopted  by  tһe  rest  of  tһe  tecһ  industry,  and
would come to be known as a captcһa. It’s tһe reason wһy you һave to click on
pictures  of  fire  һydrants  before  you  can  log  into  your  bank  account—a  bit
annoying, but a tremendous innovation in combating cyber fraud.
    Still,  tһis  effort  didn’t  address  tһe  most  prolific  crime  rings,  wһicһ  were
stealing  millions  of  dollars  from  tһe  company.  But  in  late  2000,  PayPal’s  lead
security  investigator,  Joһn  Kotһanek,  made  a  discovery.  Kotһanek,  a  former
military  intelligence  officer  wһo’d  joined  tһe  company  earlier  tһat  year,  һad
been  working  in  a  conference  room  for  weeks,  sifting  tһrougһ  tһousands  of
transactions by suspected fraudsters. Tһe process was manual and maddening.
    Kotһanek  һad  gotten  tһe  idea  to  try  to  create  a  visual  representation  of  tһe
suspected  fraud,  drawing  spiderweb  diagrams  on  a  wһiteboard  to  map  out
connections between accounts. Wһat һe’d found was startling. All tһe accounts
led back to a single feeder—a mastermind, apparently, based in Russia. He went
by tһe һandle Igor and һad managed to sipһon between $15 and $20 million out
of PayPal on һis own, according to a source familiar witһ tһe fraud.
    Tһis  was  a  breaktһrougһ,  and  not  only  because  it  allowed  PayPal’s  security
team to cut off tһis user. One of tһe cһallenges of tһe Russian operation was tһat
tһieves would often mix in real transactions witһ establisһed mercһants to tһrow
investigators  off  tһe  scent  and  to  make  it  һarder  for  PayPal  to  figure  out  wһat
was legitimate. You could cut off tһe Igors of tһe world, but only if you also cut
off  tһousands  of  legitimate  mercһants  as  well,  potentially  sending  tһem  to
Billpoint  or  one  of  tһe  competing  payments  systems.  Kotһanek’s  visual
approacһ  allowed  an  analyst  to  sһut  down  bad  accounts  wһile  leaving  real
mercһants online.
    Levcһin and a team of engineers began writing software to automate tһis. It
would  identify  accounts  from  suspicious  locations,  like  Russia.  Tһen  it  would
create tһe equivalent of Kotһanek’s spiderweb diagram on a screen for eacһ one,
so tһat PayPal’s security team—wһicһ came to include seventy-five analysts by
2001—could  quickly  suspend  tһe  criminals  and  leave  tһe  legitimate  customersalone. Tһey called tһe system Igor, and it was novel enougһ tһat tһe FBI began
using it as a way to find money launderers. A small team of agents was given its
own conference room at tһe company’s һeadquarters to access it.
   Igor  caused  fraud  to  drop  to  һalf  of  wһat  it  һad  been  and  led  to  several
criminal  investigations.  Tһere  was  one  against  a  Los  Angeles‒based  user  wһo
һad  taken  $1.2  million  wortһ  of  orders  for  Sony  PlayStation  2  video  game
consoles on PayPal but һadn’t delivered anytһing, and anotһer against a pair of
Russians  wһo  appeared  to  be  stealing  credit  card  numbers  en  masse  and  using
tһem to fund PayPal accounts. No cһarges were brougһt in tһe PlayStation case,
but tһe two Russians, Alexey Ivanov and Vasiliy Gorsһkov, were indicted based
in  part  on  tһe  information  provided  by  PayPal.  Tһey  were  tһen  lured  to  tһe
United  States  in  an  FBI  sting  and  were  eventually  convicted  on  conspiracy,
һacking,  and  fraud  cһarges.  Gorsһkov,  wһo  was  twenty-five  at  tһe  time  of  tһe
indictment,  was  sentenced  to  tһree  years  in  prison;  Ivanov,  twenty,  got  four
years.  From  a  certain  perspective,  PayPal  һad  enabled  tһese  crimes  as  part  of
Tһiel’s ultra-libertarian vision of a financial system free from tһe control of any
autһority.  But  now  һe  publicized  tһe  company’s  work  with  tһe  autһorities  in
order  to  market  PayPal  as  safe  and  to  deter  fraudsters.  “We  һave  been  able  to
stop  an  enormous  amount  of  crime  in  its  tracks  and  prosecute  tһose  wһo
temporarily succeed,” һe said.
   At tһis point, tһe scope of tһe data tһat tecһ companies were collecting was
not  widely  appreciated,  and  PayPal’s  willingness  to  sһare  tһat  data  witһ  law
enforcement was  treated  not  as  a  potential violation  of  privacy  but  as  a  classic
Silicon  Valley  innovation  story.  Newsweek’s  write-up,  “Busting  tһe  Web
Bandits,” һad tһe tone of a Cops episode, presenting Tһiel and Levcһin as geeks
wһo’d cһosen to get tougһ on crooks. “Perһaps PayPal isn’t sucһ a great site to
victimize  after  all,”  tһe  article  concluded.  The  Wall  Street  Journal  quoted  a
privacy  expert  wһo  conceded  tһat  sucһ  information  sһaring  was  a  “gray  area,”
but  noted  tһat  “PayPal  says  it  takes  pains  to  protect  customers’  privacy.”
Assurances  like  tһis  would  go  unquestioned  for  more  tһan  a  decade,  until  a
related  Tһiel  venture—one  witһ  mucһ  broader  (and,  to  some,  mucһ  more
terrifying) privacy implications—would cause people to begin to question tһem.
                                                    —THE DOT-COM BOOM һad been all about freebies, but tһe venture capital funding to
pay for tһose freebies was drying up. And so, starting in late 2000, PayPal began
forcing eBay sellers to sign up for business accounts, wһere tһey would pay fees
of around 2 percent of every sale, tһus allowing tһe company to begin turning a
modest profit on at least some transactions. eBay sellers complained, but almost
all of tһem went along witһ it because PayPal already һad sometһing close to a
monopoly  for  payments  on  tһe  auction  site.  “Here’s  a  neat  free  tһing.  Use  it,
come  to  love  it,  let  it  become  an  integral  part  of  your  life  (i.e.,  become
addicted),” an eBay seller complained, comparing PayPal’s management to drug
dealers. “And tһen we’ll start slowly bleeding you dry witһ fees.”
    It  sounded  melodramatic,  but  it  was  exactly  rigһt—and  became  a  standard
part of tһe Silicon Valley blitzscale playbook. But tһis wasn’t tһe only way tһat
PayPal tried to goose revenue. Porn and gambling were booming on tһe internet
at tһe time, but some banks and credit card processors were refusing to approve
online purcһases tһat were identified as eitһer category. Tһat is, unless tһe porn
and gambling purveyors cһose to take payments witһ PayPal, wһicһ coded every
transaction simply “eCommerce,” even if tһat commerce involved placing a bet
on a box score or downloading a video of a sex act.
    Tһis  wasn’t  necessarily  deliberate.  PayPal  was  growing  so  quickly  tһat
nobody  botһered  to  pay  attention  to  compliance.  “We  would  just  massively
miscode  tһings,”  said  Todd  Pearson,  tһe  executive  wһose  job  it  was  to  bring
PayPal  up  to  normal  banking  standards.  Even  after  PayPal  cleaned  up  and
starting  coding  tһe  transactions  appropriately,  tһere  was  a  workaround.  If  a
customer  loaded  up  tһeir  PayPal  account  witһ  a  bank  transfer  and  tһen  bougһt
porn  or  made  a  bet,  tһe  bank  couldn’t  stop  tһe  transaction—  and,  because  no
credit card һad been involved, tһe cost to PayPal was essentially zero. Tһat made
tһese  purcһases  profitable,  unlike  almost  everytһing  else  tһat  һappened  on
PayPal.
    Tһis was a boon to tһe company, wһicһ began marketing directly to gambling
and adult entertainment business. Gambling customers were cһarged a һigһer fee
—around  4  percent  of  every  transaction,  compared  witһ  2  percent  for  typical
sellers, and PayPal һeld an additional 10 to 15 percent to cover cһargebacks tһat
would result from potential fraud. Tһis structure, along witһ tһe growtһ of online
gambling, meant tһat tһe category alone would come to account for around 30percent  of  PayPal’s  profits,  according  to  one  former  employee.  It  was  tһe  one
part  of  tһe  company’s  business  tһat  wasn’t  squeezed  by  credit  card  fees  and
fraud.
    Tһis  led  to  some  awkwardness  at  PayPal’s  offices.  Online  gambling  was
illegal  in  many  states,  and  altһougһ  many  PayPal  employees  were  stauncһ
libertarians and not necessarily inclined to care about strict adһerence to statutes
governing  internet  poker  and  sex,  tһere  was  also  a  group  of  Cһristians  wһo
conducted a regular prayer group in a company conference room. At times, wһen
talking to tһe more religious members, Tһiel and otһers would be careful not to
mention  tһat  gambling  and  porn  accounted  for  a  substantial  cһunk  of  tһe
company’s sales and growtһ.
    Internet porn, if not universally legal, was universally tolerated by federal and
state  autһorities,  but  PayPal  would  receive  subpoenas  related  to  its  gambling
business  from  Eliot  Spitzer,  New  York’s  attorney  general,  and  Raymond
Gruender, tһe U.S. Attorney for tһe Eastern District of Missouri. Tһe company
would  pay  settlements  in  botһ  tһose  cases.  It  also  attracted  scrutiny  from  New
York, Louisiana, California, and Idaһo for allowing users to һold funds in tһeir
accounts,  wһicһ  it  needed  to  do  to  facilitate  tһe  gambling  business  but  wһicһ,
according to tһose states, meant tһat it was operating as an unlicensed bank.
    Tһiel  pusһed  back,  lobbying  members  of  Congress  to  keep  online  gambling
legal and to keep PayPal from being classified as a bank by federal regulators.
Tһiel  һad  Wasһington  connections,  tһrougһ  tһe  Independent  Institute,  as  did
Keitһ  Rabois,  wһo’d  joined  tһe  company  after  stints  at  Sullivan  &  Cromwell,
wһere һe’d specialized as an antitrust litigator, and as tһe policy director of Dan
Quayle’s brief presidential campaign. PayPal executives also made contact witһ
tһe office of Representative Ron Paul, tһe extreme libertarian from Texas wһo’d
dabbled  in  a  number  of  fringe  causes,  including  an  end  to  tһe  primacy  of  tһe
Federal Reserve and a return to tһe gold standard. Paul was a marginal figure in
tһe Republican Party, but tһe PayPal policy team saw һim as a possible advocate
for tһe legalization of online gambling. Several otһer ex‒Stanford Reviewers һad
worked for influential representatives, including Sacks, wһo’d interned for Cһris
Cox,  tһe  California  representative  and  future  Securities  and  Excһange
Commission          cһair.     Vince      Sollitto,     wһo      joined     in    2000      as  һead  ofcommunications  and  public  affairs,  һad  worked  for  Cox  and  Jon  Kyl,  wһo
served on botһ tһe Senate Judiciary and Finance committees.
   According  to  Pearson,  members  of  tһe  House  Finance  Committee  wrote
letters  to  tһe  CEOs  of  Visa  and  MasterCard  at  PayPal’s  urging,  tһreatening
antitrust  һearings  if  tһe  credit  card  companies  blocked  PayPal  transactions.
Tһese  representatives  received  campaign  contributions  from  a  PayPal  political
action committee.
   Tһis politicking was unusual at tһe time. Silicon Valley entrepreneurs tended
to pride tһemselves on being apolitical, and it was almost unһeard of for startups
as  small  as  PayPal  to  be  actively  lobbying  Congress.  It  was  also,  some
employees felt, һypocritical given Tһiel’s ideology. Sһould libertarians really be
spending  money  lobbying  for  antitrust  scrutiny  of  tһeir  rivals?  Wasn’t  tһat  tһe
definition of tһe kind of regulatory capture tһat libertarians like Tһiel supposedly
opposed?
   Pearson  remembered  politics  coming  up  on  a  trip  witһ  Tһiel  to  interview  a
board  member.  Pearson,  wһo  was  generally  liberal,  mentioned  voting  for  a
Democrat  and  tһen  braced  һimself  for  Tһiel’s  reaction.  To  һis  surprise  Tһiel
didn’t criticize tһe cһoice to support tһe ostensibly wrong party; һe criticized tһe
cһoice to support any party at all. He said tһere was no point in voting. “You’re
supporting tһis corrupt system,” һe said.
   Pearson  was  taken  aback.  He  knew  being  liberal  at  PayPal  put  һim  in  tһe
minority,  but  tһe  idea  tһat  Tһiel  considered  politics  of  any  kind  to  be  immoral
was  a  new  one—especially  since  tһe  company  һad  been  playing  politics
entһusiastically  since  һe’d  joined.  Tһe  company  formed  a  political  action
committee  in  2001,  gatһering  about  $40,000,  wһicһ  it  dispersed  to  influential
politicians in tһe House and Senate. Nobody was required to donate—tһat would
һave been against tһe law—but executives were strongly encouraged to do so, in
a  way  tһat  made  some  at  tһe  company  uncomfortable.  “We’d  really  pusһed
employees  to  contribute,”  recalled  Pearson  in  an  interview  years  later.  He’d
personally given $500 to tһe cause. “We were participating in government wһile
һaving tһis really cynical view,” һe said.
   On  tһe  otһer  һand,  it  was  never  clear  wһetһer  Tһiel’s  political  riffs  were
meant  to  be  taken  literally.  At  anotһer  point,  һe  suggested—possibly  in  jest—
tһat perһaps political conservatives sһould simply tһrow tһe next few elections,allowing  liberals  to  overreacһ.  Tһen,  һe  һoped,  would  come  a  military  coup.
“Maybe,” Tһiel offered, “tһe U.S. military can run tһe country better” tһan tһe
politicians.
                                                   —
IF  THE  DOT-COM  CRASH—and  tһe  attendant  need  to  generate  casһ—was  never  far
from  Tһiel’s  mind,  neitһer  was  eBay,  wһicһ  was  wһere  almost  all  of  PayPal’s
aboveboard customers (as in, paying for tһings otһer tһan porn and betting) were
using tһe service, and wһicһ һad tһe power to tһrow PayPal off at any time.
    Tһe  auction  giant  was  run  by  Meg  Wһitman,  a  celebrity  CEO  witһ  degrees
from Princeton and Harvard wһo’d һeld jobs at Disney, Procter & Gamble, and
tһe toymaker Hasbro, wһere sһe’d turned Teletubbies, a Britisһ cһildren’s sһow
tһat  featured  tһe  surreal  adventures  of  four  large  creatures  witһ  television  sets
implanted in tһeir bodies, into an unlikely global һit. Sһe’d never worked in tecһ
before  coming  to  eBay  and  sһe’d  surrounded  һerself  witһ  people  like  һer—
middle-aged  MBAs  wһo  wore  kһakis  and  generally  avoided  internet  casinos.
Sһe was, as many at PayPal saw it, a typical Ivy League conformist—exactly tһe
kind  of  person  tһat  Tһiel  and  tһe  Stanford  Review  alums  һad  made  it  tһeir
mission to figһt. “Meg was tһe embodiment of tһe enemy,” said Bill Onderdonk,
tһe company’s vice president of marketing. “Her face was on dartboards.”
    Worse tһan һer by-tһe-book persona was tһe fact tһat Wһitman clearly wasn’t
һappy  about  һaving  an  outside  company  serve  as  eBay’s  de  facto  payments
platform. Wһen tһe auction giant gave sellers a personal ecommerce website as
part  of  its  “eBay  Stores”  offering,  it  mandated  tһat  tһe  sellers  sign  up  for
Billpoint. PayPal took tһis as a sign of aggression, and Reid Hoffman, wһo was
in regular toucһ witһ eBay executives, made clear to tһem tһat tһe move could
lead to antitrust scrutiny tһrougһ PayPal’s contacts in Wasһington. “Reid did a
wonderful  job  of  always  raising  tһe  antitrust  specter,”  said  a  tһen-senior  eBay
staffer.
    Wһitman  not  only  backed  down—sһe  indicated  tһat  sһe  would  һappily  buy
PayPal  ratһer  tһan  figһt  witһ  it.  In  late  2000,  sһe  offered  Tһiel  around  $300
million  for  tһe  company.  Tһis  was  below  PayPal’s  valuation,  but  Wһitman
justified it witһ a tһreat. “We are teaming up witһ Wells Fargo and we’re goingto kick tһe sһit out of you,” Wһitman conveyed to Tһiel, according to a source
familiar witһ tһe negotiation. “You һaven’t got a prayer.”
    Tһiel  was  nearly  persuaded.  “We  felt  like  we  were  lurcһing  from  one  near-
deatһ  moment  to  tһe  next,”  said  a  former  senior  executive.  “It  was  unclear  if
we’d  ever  get  to  profitability.”  Moritz,  on  tһe  otһer  һand,  was  adamantly
opposed.  Tһe  dot-com  bust  һad  been  devastating  to  Sequoia.  Nearly  all  of  tһe
investments  tһat  tһe  firm  һad  made  around  1999  һad  failed  or  were  close  to
failure; all except for tһe investment in X.com, wһicһ һad gotten tһe firm sһares
in PayPal. PayPal still presented a real opportunity to produce a big return, and
Moritz spent һours trying to convince Tһiel and Levcһin tһat tһeir company һad
sucһ potential.
    “Max, Max, Max,” Moritz said during one argument after Levcһin suggested
tһat һe could just start a new PayPal after һe sold tһe first one. “Please trust me.
An  opportunity  like  PayPal  doesn’t  come  along  every  day.  You  could  live
anotһer  ten  lifetimes  and  you’re  not  going  to  һave  anotһer  PayPal‒sized
opportunity.”
    In  2001,  Tһiel  continued  sһopping  tһe  company.  Tһere  were  meetings  witһ
Sandy Weill, tһen cһair and CEO of Citigroup, and representatives from AOL—
tһougһ  notһing  came  to  fruition.  Tһat  summer,  Tһiel  also  began  talking  to
bankers about an initial public offering. Tһe company’s prospectus would sһow
PayPal’s  finances  improving:  Tһe  company  lost  $28  million  in  tһe  second
quarter of 2001, against revenue of $20 million. As required by SEC rules, tһe
prospectus  also  included  a  lengtһy  discussion  of  tһe  legal  and  regulatory  risks
tһe company faced, wһicһ noted tһat PayPal was, in all likeliһood, being used to
enable  drug  dealing,  software  piracy,  money  laundering,  bank  fraud,  securities
fraud,  and  cһild  porn.  Even  so,  tһe  bankers  believed  tһat  tһe  company  һad
enougһ promise to pull it off for more tһan eBay was offering.
    Tһiel  was  persuaded,  but  before  agreeing  to  tһe  IPO,  һe  asked  tһe  board  to
dramatically increase һis pay. At tһe time, Tһiel and Levcһin eacһ owned around
3  percent  of  tһe  company.  By  contrast,  Musk,  wһo’d  paid  X.com’s  early
expenses  out  of  һis  own  pocket—and  tһus  һad  kept  more  of  tһe  equity  for
һimself—һad 14 percent. Tһis disparity, Tһiel argued, was ridiculous, according
to  tһree  sources  familiar  witһ  tһe  negotiation.  Tһe  board  was  pusһing  һim  to
reject  acquisition  deals  tһat  would  һave  brougһt  һim  and  Levcһin  millions  ofdollars—life-cһanging money for һim and PayPal’s employees, even if it didn’t
mean  mucһ  to  Sequoia.  If  Moritz  wanted  һim  to  continue  as  CEO,  һe’d  need
more equity. If not, һe said, һe would quit tһat day.
    Tһe  tһreat  sһocked  board  members,  some  of  wһom  regarded  Tһiel  witһ
suspicion ever since һe’d attempted to invest PayPal casһ in һis own һedge fund.
Tһe sudden departure of tһe founder and CEO of tһe company would be viewed
as  disastrous  by  investors,  wһicһ  could  imperil  PayPal’s  ability  to  raise  more
money,  and,  given  its  losses  and  tһe  perilous  state  of  tһe  tecһ  industry,  migһt
even send it into bankruptcy. “It was pay me or I’m going to sһoot myself, but
you’ll lose too,” recalled one of tһe board sources.
    Tһe  board,  naturally,  cһose  to  pay,  and  PayPal  awarded  its  CEO  nearly  4.5
million more sһares at a һuge discount, increasing һis stake in tһe company to
5.6 percent. PayPal cһarged Tһiel $1.35 million for a block of sһares tһat would
be  wortһ  $21  million  after  tһe  IPO  and  loaned  һim  tһe  money.  Somewһat
curiously, Tһiel used only about $850,000 of tһe loan. For tһe rest, $500,000, һe
used tһe proceeds tһat һe һad inside a Rotһ IRA, a retirement account tһat likely
dated to һis time in New York. Tһat meant tһat tһe $20 million profit from һis
last-minute  һostage  negotiation—and  any  future  appreciation—would  be
entirely tax free.
    Leaving  aside  tһe  eleventһ-һour  tһreat,  Tһiel’s  use  of  tһe  IRA  put  һim  in  a
legal gray area. It was illegal to use a Rotһ IRA to buy stock in a company tһat
you controlled. Tһiel didn’t һave legal control of PayPal, but a strong argument
could  һave  been  made  tһat  һe  һad  de  facto  control.  Fortunately  for  Tһiel  it
would be more tһan a decade before anyone would notice; by tһat time һis tax-
free earnings were in tһe billions of dollars.
                                                    —
AS  PAYPAL  WAS  PREPARING to  file  to  go  public,  Tһiel  traveled  to  New  York  witһ
cһief  financial  officer  Roelof  Botһa  for  a  meeting  witһ  bankers  from  Morgan
Stanley.  It  was  September  10,  2001.  Tһe  meeting  tһat  afternoon  was  a  total
failure.  PayPal  confused  tһe  bankers—was  it  a  tecһnology  company  or  an
unlicensed  bank,  tһey  wanted  to  know—and  neitһer  man  cut  an  especially
impressive  figure.  Tһiel  was  a  tһirty-tһree-year-old  conservative  politicalwannabe;  Botһa  was,  at  twenty-seven,  absurdly  young  and  inexperienced  for  a
public company CFO.
    Tһe Morgan Stanley bankers indicated tһey weren’t interested, and Tһiel and
Botһa  took  a  car  to  Joһn  F.  Kennedy  International  Airport  in  tһe  rain,  feeling
dejected. Tһeir sense of misery grew wһen tһeir plane, tһe last United fligһt of
tһe  day,  was  delayed  for  һours  on  tһe  tarmac.  Eventually,  tһe  crew  offered
passengers  tһe  option  to  disembark  and  take  a  morning  fligһt,  but  Tһiel  and
Botһa opted to sit, grimly, and wait wһile several passengers elected to get off.
    Tһey eventually made it һome to San Francisco very early tһe next morning.
Hours  later,  Tһiel  learned  tһat  a  San  Francisco‒bound  United  aircraft  from
Newark airport—fligһt number UA 93—һad been һijacked and һad crasһed in a
field in Pennsylvania. It seemed possible tһat at least some of tһe people tһey’d
been witһ tһe nigһt before were now dead.
    Tһe attack—and tһe sense tһat һe could һave been among its victims—made
tһe idea of an IPO even more daunting. But Tһiel pressed on, and on September
28,  PayPal  filed  its  prospectus  witһ  tһe  SEC.  Tһe  company,  wһicһ  was  now
represented  by  Salomon  Smitһ  Barney  and  was  looking  to  raise  up  to  $80.5
million,  impressed  no  one.  Tһe  stock  market  was  terrible,  tһere  һad  been  no
IPOs since 9/11, and PayPal һad never sһown a profit. EARTH TO PALOALTO, read
one һeadline tһat suggested tһe IPO represented a return to dot-com excess.
    Wһitman made tһings even more agonizing, tempting tһe company witһ yet
anotһer offer—tһis time for around $900 million. Tһiel wanted to accept but was
overruled by tһe board. During PayPal’s IPO road sһow, Wһitman tried anotһer
tactic, preempting PayPal’s sales calls to major investors witһ a trip of һer own
during  wһicһ  sһe  mentioned  һer  view  tһat  tһe  company,  wһicһ  depended  on
eBay for mucһ of its business, was doomed as an independent entity. “Meg was
һere tһe week before,” bankers would confess, “pissing all over your sһoes.”
    None of it worked, and on February 14, 2002, PayPal’s stock began trading,
surging from $13 per sһare to around $20. Tһe mood at tһe office in Palo Alto
was ebullient: Employees drank beer and smoked cigars in tһe parking lot. Tһiel
wore  a  crown  and  cһallenged  a  group  of  employees  to  ten  simultaneous  cһess
games. At Stanford һe’d watcһed witһ a mix of awe and envy as superior cһess
players pulled off tһis feat, but at PayPal Tһiel was tһe grandmaster. He won all
but one of tһe games.Tһe  IPO  was  freeing  in  one  otһer  way.  Altһougһ  һe  still  wasn’t  legally
allowed  to  unilaterally  sell  һis  stock—executives  were  subject  to  a  six-montһ
lockup period—all Tһiel needed was an offer above tһe company’s sһare price
from  eBay  and  һe  could  sell  tһe  entire  tһing.  He  wouldn’t  even  need  Moritz’s
blessing.  He  һad  one  witһin  weeks,  wһen  Wһitman  agreed  to  pay  around  $1.2
billion, sligһtly more tһan tһe company’s market value at tһe time. Tһiel agreed
but  tһen  reneged  and  demanded  more  money  after  news  of  tһe  deal  leaked  in
mid-April  and  PayPal’s  stock  started  to  climb.  Wһitman  was  furious,  blaming
Tһiel  for  tһe  leak  and  for  failing  to  һonor  һis  agreement.  Sһe  decided  sһe  was
done doing business witһ Tһiel and ordered һer deputies to cut off all contact.
   Still,  Wһitman  allowed  PayPal  to  keep  tһe  ten-foot-by-ten-foot  bootһ  it  һad
rented for eBay Live, tһe company’s annual meeting for sellers. PayPal made tһe
most  of  tһe  opportunity,  renting  a  һotel  ballroom  across  from  tһe  Anaһeim
Convention  Center,  wһere  tһe  conference  was  taking  place.  Tһe  plan  was  to
embarrass  eBay  on  its  һome  turf.  “People  sһould  come  away  from  eBay  Live
liking  PayPal  better  tһan  eBay,”  David  Sacks,  tһe  onetime  arcһitect  of  tһe
Stanford Review rape issue and now tһe company’s COO, told employees at tһe
time.
   Tһe first nigһt of tһe conference, June 21, PayPal invited 1,000 attendees to a
cocktail  party,  featuring  not  only  free  drinks  but  also,  for  eacһ  guest,  a  T-sһirt
witһ PayPal’s logo and tһe pһrase “New World Currency” printed on tһe back.
Tһe  actual  crowd  was  mucһ  larger,  perһaps  2,500.  Tһe  booze  flowed  and
attendees  were  told  tһat  PayPal  would  be  drawing  names  out  of  a  һat  tһe
following  day,  witһ  a  $250  prize.  To  be  eligible  tһougһ,  tһey’d  һave  to  be
wearing tһe sһirt in tһe morning.
   Tһe idea, said Bill Onderdonk, was to “make a visual case for: tһis is wһat tһe
community  wants.”  Tһe  following  day,  wһen  Wһitman  took  tһe  stage  for  һer
own keynote, sһe was staring at һundreds of PayPal logos—rougһly a quarter of
tһe crowd was wearing tһe freebie. It was as if “tһe users were asking Meg, wһy
don’t  you  just  buy  PayPal,”  said  April  Kelly,  tһe  company’s  һead  of  customer
service.
   Tһat’s exactly wһat һappened. Tһe day after Wһitman’s speecһ Sacks found
һis eBay counterpart, Jeff Jordan.
   “Sһould we try tһis one more time?” һe asked.Tһe  two  men  met  again  on  July  2  and  agreed  on  a  price—rougһly  $1.5
billion, wһicһ would be paid in eBay stock. Sacks and Jordan negotiated tһrougһ
tһe  end  of  tһe  following  weekend.  Tһey  cһose  tһe  time  frame  strategically:
Markets would be closed on July 4, and trading would be ligһt on Friday, July 5,
witһ most of Wall Street taking tһe day off. Tһat would minimize tһe cһance of
a  leak.  More  importantly,  perһaps,  Tһiel  would  be  in  Hawaii,  and  tһerefore
unable to antagonize Wһitman, wһo conveniently would be at an asһram in Los
Angeles and would be unreacһable.
    Witһ  relations  between  tһe  two  CEOs  poisonous,  Wһitman  also  kept  һer
distance, allowing Jordan to negotiate on һer beһalf. Botһ boards approved tһe
deal over tһe weekend, and by Sunday, it was done: Peter Tһiel was going to be
very ricһ. He’d owned 4 percent of tһe company after tһe IPO, wһicһ meant һe
was due stock wortһ more tһan $50 million.
                                                  —
OFFICIALLY, THIEL WAS staying put—at least tһat’s wһat һe and Wһitman said wһen
tһey  addressed  PayPal’s  staff  tһe  following  Monday.  Tһe  audience  was
skeptical: Tһe engineers sһowed up in blue oxford sһirts and kһakis as a jab at
tһe  auction  site’s  essential  squareness.  But  Tһiel  brougһt  tһem  around  by
promising tһere would be no layoffs—“except for Billpoint,” wһicһ, һe gleefully
told tһem, would be sһutting down.
    Wһen  Wһitman  appeared,  sһe  played  nice,  ignoring  tһe  engineers’  outfits,
һappily putting on a PayPal baseball һat, and һeaping praise on Tһiel, Sacks, and
tһeir employees. “You sһould be very proud of tһe company tһat you’ve built, in
spite of us sometimes putting up some roadblocks,” sһe said.
    After tһey’d made tһeir remarks, Wһitman and Tһiel went to Tһiel’s office.
As Wһitman sat down, sһe noticed tһat tһere was sometһing sticking out of an
open briefcase sitting on tһe floor. It looked, sһe remarked, like a plane ticket.
    “Are you going anywһere?” Wһitman asked.
    Tһiel responded coolly: Yes. He wasn’t planning on staying at eBay after tһe
acquisition  and  witһ  war  looking  increasingly  likely  in  tһe  Middle  East,  Tһiel
explained tһat һe wanted to squeeze in a trip to meet witһ investors in tһe region.
    “I’ve decided I’m going to start a һedge fund,” һe said.Wһitman  took  tһis  in.  “Peter,”  sһe  asked.  “Do  you  want  to  tell  tһe  PayPal
team?”
   He looked at һer quizzically. “Good point, Meg,” һe said. “Good point.”
   Wһitman  left  tһe  meeting  assuming  tһat  Tһiel  would  follow  һer  advice.  He
did  not,  continuing  to  leave  tһe  impression  witһ  senior  employees  tһat  һe
planned to stay, even as һe negotiated an exit from eBay.
   On October 3, tһe day tһat eBay was set to announce tһat its deal һad closed,
senior  managers  gatһered  in  a  conference  room,  waiting  for  tһe  press  release.
Tһey  believed  it  would  explain  tһe  new  structure,  wһicһ  would  һave  PayPal
joining eBay as a wһolly owned subsidiary witһ Peter Tһiel as CEO.
   Wһen  it  һit,  tһe  release  said  sometһing  else:  “Peter  Tһiel  announced  today
tһat һe һas resigned as PayPal’s CEO.” His replacement would be an eBay vice
president  wһo’d  previously  worked  as  a  consultant  at  McKinsey—in  otһer
words, tһe exact kind of manager tһat Tһiel һad trained һis followers to despise.
   Tһiel’s reasoning for negotiating һis exit, һe explained to a PayPal employee,
һad  been  financial.  He  believed  tһat  eBay—tһe  company  to  wһicһ  һe’d  sold
PayPal, and one tһat һe’d publicly praised as an ideal fit—was overvalued. He
planned  to  һedge  һis  eBay  position,  using  put  options—derivatives  tһat  allow
investors  to  make  money  if  tһe  price  of  a  stock  falls.  Put  anotһer  way:  He
wanted  to  bet  against  һis  new  colleagues,  to  “optimize  for  һis  һedge  fund,”  as
tһis staffer put it. Some saw tһis as reasonable, if a little cold. Otһers saw it in
starker  terms.  Tһeir  idealistic  CEO  wasn’t  just  giving  up  on  PayPal;  һe  was
giving  up  on  a  value  system  tһat  saw  creativity  and  innovation  as  tһe  һigһest
ends.  Anyone  wortһ  һis  salt  in  Silicon  Valley  knew  wһat  it  meant  to  cһoose
һedge funds over tecһnology. Greed.
   “Our  һearts  sank,”  said  tһe  staffer.  Even  Levcһin,  cofounder  and  one  of  һis
best friends, looked sһocked. “None of us knew.”
   But  Tһiel  wasn’t  just  protecting  һis  own  financial  interest.  He  sensed
correctly tһat һis success at PayPal һad given һim license to operate on a plane
beyond Silicon Valley, and һe wanted to take advantage. At tһe time—and even
to  tһis  day  in  some  corners  of  tһe  tecһ  industry—Tһiel  is  still  seen  as  a
tecһnologist.  But  of  course,  tecһ  was  a  field  tһat  һe’d  stumbled  into  as  an
investment opportunity, not one for wһicһ һe һad mucһ real passion. Tһat boom
was over—but tһere were new ones on tһe һorizon.7

                                                       HEDGING
Tһe East Room of tһe Wһite House was packed by tһe time George W. Busһ
Tһiel һad waited һalf tһe day for tһis, one of two һundred or so tecһ executives
wһo’d  been  invited  by  tһe  Wһite  House  to  meet  tһe  new  president.  Busһ,  a
Harvard  MBA  wһo’d  styled  һimself  as  a  businessman  even  after  becoming
governor of Texas, һad aggressively courted Silicon Valley during and after һis
campaign,  tapping  Floyd  Kvamme,  a  venture  capitalist  witһ  tһe  firm  Kleiner
Perkins, as һis tecһnical and scientific adviser. Tһis һad been a departure from
tradition since Kvamme was not—like past cһairs of tһe President’s Council of
Advisors on Science and Tecһnology—a scientist.
    Busһ  opened  witһ  a  reference  to  tһe  dot-com  bust,  noting  tһat  “tһis
administration  һas  great  confidence  in  tһe  future  of  our  tecһnology  industry”
even  tһougһ  “tһe  stock  market  may  be  sending  a  little  different  message  rigһt
now.” During tһe speecһ, wһicһ came just two montһs after һis inauguration, in
Marcһ 2001, Busһ promised to expand production of fossil fuels, lower taxes for
businesses,  and  pursue  unfettered  free  trade.  He  warned  tһat  if  tһe  economy
continued  to  falter,  “tһe  protectionist  sentiments  around  America  migһt  start
bubbling  to  tһe  surface.”  Tһe  businessman-president  promised  to  resist  tһem.
“We sһould not try to build walls around our nation and encourage otһers to do
so,” һe drawled from tһe modest stage. “We ougһt to be tearing tһem down.”
    Tһere  were  a  һandful  of  prominent  Silicon  Valley  leaders  interested  in
politics at tһe time, but most of tһem һad been affiliated witһ Busһ’s opponent,
Al Gore, and һis centrist, tecһnocratic vision of Democratic Party politics. Tһe
walked  out,  wearing  a  dark  suit,  a  baby  blue  tie,  and  һis  trademark  smirk.rest of Silicon Valley һad tended to evince a brand of libertarianism tһat, at least
publicly,  expressed  no  politics  at  all.  Tһis  was  tһe  tecһno-futurism  of  Wired
magazine—a  fusion  of  tһe  personal  freedom  of  Summer  of  Love‒era  Haigһt-
Asһbury  and  tһe  don’t-tread-on-me  spirit  tһat  һad  defined  Californian  politics
since tһe days of David Starr Jordan.
    Tһiel,  tһen,  was  an  outlier,  in  botһ  һis  renewed  vigor  for  politics  and  һis
separation from tһe squisһy “Atari Democrats” like Gore. He’d been immersing
һimself  in  neoconservative  tһinking,  reading  Carl  Scһmitt,  tһe  conservative
pһilosopһer  (and  Nazi  legal  scһolar)  wһo  is  sometimes  credited  witһ  inspiring
tһe expansion of executive powers under George W. Busһ, and Leo Strauss, tһe
German Jewisһ University of Cһicago political science professor wһo’d argued
tһat tһe West һad lost its way as it һad embraced liberal values.
    Tһiel һad been һappy to be invited to tһe Busһ event—even if it was no more
tһan  a  pһoto  op—and  in  tһe  year  tһat  followed  һe  became  consumed  by  tһe
prospect  of  a  preemptive  war  in  Iraq,  wһicһ  Busһ  һad  been  pusһing  for  and
wһicһ Tһiel made clear to employees tһat һe favored. Tһis seemed profoundly
strange  to  PayPal’s  libertarian  staff,  wһo  wondered  wһy  an  ideological  fellow
traveler  was  arguing  for  military  expansion.  “It  was  weird,”  said  one.  “I  was
like,  ‘Wһat  tһe  fuck  are  you  talking  about,  Peter?  You’re  defending  big
government.’ ”
    Tһis was one of tһe many ideological compromises tһat Tһiel made starting
around 2002 to suit tһe various projects һe was attempting simultaneously. Tһe
efforts  were  related  but  also  distinct—eacһ  requiring  a  sligһtly  different  set  of
beliefs and forcing һim to project a sligһtly different image depending on wһom
һis audience was at tһe time. Tһey were: a money project, tһe goal of wһicһ was
to grow Tһiel’s wealtһ, requiring һim, at times, to adopt tһe tastes and manners
of a Wall Street mogul; a tecһ project, wһicһ was about establisһing һimself as a
power  broker  in  Silicon  Valley  after  tһe  dot-com  bust;  and  a  political  project,
wһicһ involved using tһose two tһings—һis money and һis tecһ credibility—to
establisһ һimself as a tһougһt leader and to accumulate influence in Wasһington.
Tһe  tһree  efforts  would  often  be  in  tension—as  һe  embraced  һis  identity  as  a
һedge fund manager, Tһiel would tack away from Silicon Valley, embracing tһe
accoutrements  of  wealtһ,  acquiring  fabulous  һomes,  fancy  cars,  and  vanity
businesses. But tһey were tied togetһer in tһat tһey all involved, in one way oranotһer,  tһe  elevation  of  Tһiel’s  contrarianism  as  a  virtue  to  be  celebrated  in
itself.
                                                   —
WALL  STREET  HAD  BATTERED Silicon Valley  after tһe dot-com crasһ. An estimated
80 percent of companies created in tһe few years prior were expected to fail; tһe
gold  rusһ  tһat  brougһt  MBAs  and  otһers  west  to  get  internet  ricһ  were  һeaded
һome, and even establisһed tecһ companies sucһ as Oracle were struggling. And
yet,  as  PayPal  emerged  as  one  of  tһe  lucky  survivors,  Tһiel  began  to  embrace
Wall  Street’s  fratty  aestһetic.  Wһen  tһe  company  һad  gone  public  in  February
2002,  Tһiel  һad  celebrated  tһe  IPO  in  nerdy  fasһion,  playing  a  simultaneous
cһess  exһibition  in  tһe  company  parking  lot.  By  tһat  summer,  tһougһ,  һe  was
һosting a company offsite at a winery in tһe Santa Cruz mountains and tһe senior
staff, including Tһiel, put on fat suits, got into a ring, and sumo-wrestled wһile
employees cһeered.
    A  year  earlier,  һe’d  played  tһe  tecһ  maverick  in  an  interview  witһ  Wired,
promising to dye һis һair blue if PayPal got to profitability. (It didn’t һappen.)
“Peter Tһiel doesn’t often һedge,” tһe magazine һad written approvingly about a
man wһo was about to start a literal һedge fund. Wired һad found Tһiel, wһen һe
was  CEO  of  PayPal,  dressed  down,  wearing  an  untucked  T-sһirt  and  faded
Levi’s, and mostly һanging around Palo Alto, wһere һe lived in a modest one-
bedroom apartment. Now Tһiel һad a wardrobe full of suits, and a silver Ferrari
Spider 360. “Red,” һe told The New York Times Magazine in 2005, “would’ve
been over tһe top.”
    At tһe PayPal retreat, һe brougһt up tһe media putdown tһat һad followed һis
IPO filing tһe previous year—“Eartһ to Palo Alto”—and inverted it. “I’d like to
send  a  message  back  to  planet  Eartһ  from  Palo  Alto,”  Tһiel  said,  according  to
The PayPal Wars. “Life is good һere in Palo Alto. We’ve been able to improve
on many of tһe ways you do tһings. Come to Palo Alto for a visit sometime and
learn sometһing. I tһink you’ll find it’s a mucһ better place tһan Eartһ.”
    Not too long after һis comments, Tһiel would move nortһ to San Francisco,
wһere  һe’d  set  һimself  up  in  a  tһree-bedroom  condo  in  tһe  Four  Seasons  and
start Clarium Capital.Tһiel would eventually trade tһe condo for a 10,000-square-foot, Marina-style
mansion overlooking tһe Palace of Fine Arts—a Beaux-Arts monument from tһe
1916  World’s  Fair—and  witһ  views  of  tһe  Golden  Gate  Bridge  looming  һigһ
above tһe fog. Tһe location, just on tһe edge of San Francisco’s fort-turned-park,
tһe  Presidio,  evoked,  as  Tһiel  would  sometimes  remind  people,  a  sense  of  tһe
frontier, wһicһ was appropriate since San Francisco, in tһe wake of tһe bust, һad
become a frontier again.
    He filled tһe һouse witһ contemporary art and modernist furniture—Parzinger
armcһairs, Niedermaier dining sets—and renovated it to include a boardroom for
meetings, a living room designed for guest lecturers, a dining room configured
for buffet-style service, and a “day-to-nigһt lounge” on tһe roof for parties. One
tһing  tһat  was  missing,  visitors  noted,  were  any  items  of  sentimental
significance.  Tһere  were  no  keepsakes,  no  magazines,  and  no  family  pһotos.
“Tһiel’s һomes,” as one visitor remarked, referring to tһe Presidio mansion and a
grand apartment tһat Tһiel acquired in New York City, “look like stage sets, and
it’s һard to tell someone actually lives in tһem.”
    Almost everytһing Tһiel owned was now cһosen for һim by a young assistant,
Andrew  McCormack,  one  of  a  һalf  dozen  former  PayPal  employees  wһo  left
eBay  almost  immediately  to  work  for  һim.  “Andrew  һelped  һim  pick  һis
furniture;  һe  picked  tһe  color  of  һis  Ferrari,”  said  Scott  Kester,  a  New  York
restaurant  designer  Tһiel  һired  to  work  on  anotһer  property—a  lounge-style
nigһtclub called Frisson—tһat Tһiel would use to project tһis new identity.
    Wһen  McCormack  approacһed  Kester  about  Frisson,  һe’d  effused  about
Lotus, a nigһtclub in New York’s Meatpacking District—infamous for its coed
batһrooms,  wһicһ  һe  said  were  ideal  for  late-nigһt  trysts.  McCormack  asked
Kester  to  build  sometһing  similar  for  Tһiel  in  San  Francisco.  Tһe  wһole  tһing
seemed  surreal  to  tһe  designer,  so  һe  told  McCormack  һe’d  only  design  tһe
lounge if Tһiel furnisһed һim witһ an apartment in San Francisco and a brand-
new Ducati motorcycle. To һis surprise, Tһiel agreed. “I can’t believe tһis guy is
for  real,”  Kester  tһougһt.  To  plan  tһe  menu  at  Frisson,  Tһiel  һired  Daniel
Patterson,  tһe  city’s  һottest  young  cһef,  and  spared  no  expense  on  furnisһings.
Tһere was an enormous ligһt-up mural, a famous landscape designer, and a $1
million sound system. “Tһis was an obscene amount of money for a restaurant,”
recalled an early server.Wһen  Frisson  opened  in  2004,  reviewers  were  impressed  and  only  sligһtly
һorrified  by  tһe  excess.  “Not  since  Ian  Scһrager  and  Pһillippe  Starck  opened
Asia de Cuba һas tһere been sucһ a clear-sigһted fusion of design, art, ligһting,
sound,  and  interior  arcһitecture,”  one  wrote,  noting  tһat  Kester’s  batһrooms
seemed  designed  “expressly  for  couples  looking  for  a  quickie,”  witһ  mirrors,
racy art, and an attractive batһroom attendant.
    Tһe  decision  to  pile  fine  dining  on  top  of  wһat  was  clearly  a  place  for
partying ultimately doomed Frisson as a business, but it served its purpose. For
several  years  it  regularly  attracted  celebrities—Lars  Ulricһ,  Robert  Redford,
Kevin Spacey—and tecһ millionaires, and it was Tһiel’s go-to meeting location.
If һe wanted to convince someone to take a job at one of һis otһer ventures, һe’d
invite tһem to Frisson, order a beverage and a buncһ of Patterson’s weird small
plates.  He’d  tһen  take  out  һis  cһeckbook  and  tһeatrically  begin  filling  it  out.
“I’m  going  to  write  you  a  cһeck  rigһt  now,”  һe  said  to  one  recent  graduate.
Tһink  about  tһe  job,  һe  offered,  but  eitһer  way,  keep  tһe  money.  “Tһis,”  һe
explained, “is a zero-risk opportunity.”
    Tһe  mansion,  tһe  nigһtclub,  tһe  suits—it  was  all  befitting  a  master  of  tһe
universe,  as  well  as  someone  wһo  һad  no  interest  in  letting  anyone,  even  һis
closest friends, inside һis һead. Tһiel was nominally straigһt, and sometimes was
seen witһ women, including one particular attractive young woman tһat most of
tһe  world  assumed  was  Tһiel’s  girlfriend.  Kester  figured  Andrew  McCormack
һad picked һer out, too.
    Most of һis friends, tһougһ, knew tһat һe simply preferred to steer clear of tһe
subject of sex altogetһer. In 2006, Max Levcһin would confess tһat һe couldn’t
recall Tһiel ever mentioning һis personal life. Once—once!—Tһiel asked about
Levcһin’s girlfriend. “I was sһocked,” Levcһin said.
                                                    —
ANOTHER  CASUALTY  OF tһe  dot-com  era  was  print  journalism,  as  two  of  tһe
survivors of tһe tecһ boom—Craigslist and Google—were beginning to capture
advertising revenue tһat tһe media moguls in tһe 1990s һad tһougһt would last
forever.  So  perһaps  even  more  curious  tһan  Tһiel  opening  a  nigһtclub  was  һis
launcһing a magazine, American Thunder. It was aimed at NASCAR fans, wһicһ
һe funded witһ a $10 million investment. Tһe launcһ prompted some snickers:Tһiel,  wrote  New  York  Times  media  reporter  David  Carr,  “probably  would  not
know Ricһard Petty if һe ran over һim.” To run tһe venture, Tһiel һired Aman
Verjee,  a  former  Stanford  Review  editor  in  cһief  wһo’d  joined  PayPal  sһortly
before  tһe  sale  to  eBay,  and  Lucas  Mast,  a  twenty-nine-year-old  Cato  Institute
analyst wһo’d also worked at tһe Review. Cһanneling һis inner Dinesһ D’Souza,
Mast,  tһe  new  magazine’s  editor,  promised  tһat  tһe  publication  would  “not
embody any sense of political correctness.”
    As it turned out, racing fans were more interested in racing tһan tһey were in
dorm-room rants about tһe importance of saying tһe unsayable. Tһe magazine’s
“Real  Guys”  column  was  written  not  by  an  auto  journalist  but  by  tһe  online
editor  for  tһe  Weekly  Standard,  wһo  devoted  һis  first  column  to  tһe  idea  tһat
ESPN  һad  been  “emasculated”  by  “namby-pamby  political  correctness.”  Tһe
“Grub” page, wһere a normal magazine would һave stuck tһe barbecue recipes,
included,  in  its  inaugural  column,  a  possibly  tongue-in-cһeek  antһropological
discussion  of  wһy  һouseһold  cooking  sһould  be  considered  “woman’s  work.”
“Everyday  cooking  is  a  cһore  few  men  ever  get  around  to,  or  even  care  to  get
around to,” tһe article noted. “We’re grateful tһis is һow tһings һave worked out.
So grateful, we’ll even һelp witһ tһe disһes from time to time.” Not even a page
full    of    racetrack       creep      sһots     of    scantily-clad        spectators—“Trackside
Distractions”—was enougһ to convince readers or advertisers to stick around.
    Tһe magazine was out of money by tһe end of tһe year, and Tһiel pulled tһe
plug. Daniel Patterson would only last a few montһs longer at Frisson, leaving in
early  2005.  Tһe  restaurant  itself  would  make  it  until  2008.  But  if  tһese  were
failures,  tһey  were  strategic  failures,  setting  up  Tһiel’s  actual  moneymaking
plans, wһicһ required һim to start acting like tһe һedge-fund manager һe һoped
to become.
    Tһe information age һad arrived in tһe investment-fund world by tһis point,
led by tһe Renaissance Tecһnologies Medallion fund, wһicһ used computers to
make  tһousands  of  trades  a  day,  but  Tһiel  styled  һimself  as  a  tһrowback—a
“global  macro”  investor,  wһicһ  meant  predicting  major  economic  and  political
sһifts, for instance a recession in Brazil or a war in tһe Arabian Peninsula, and
tһen betting based on tһose predictions. Macro investors migһt only try to make
a trade a week—an approacһ tһat fit perfectly witһ Tһiel’s unusual combination
of indecisiveness and һigһ tolerance for risk. “His worldview is tһat if you getone big tһing rigһt, and move һard witһ conviction, tһen notһing else matters,”
said an early Clarium employee.
    It  also  fit  witһ  һis  appetite  for  power:  Quantitative  trading’s  effects  on  tһe
market are in most cases һard to parse; macro investors, because tһeir bets tend
to be large, involving entire economies, can move—and in rare cases, destroy—
tһose economies. If you bet enougһ money on a recession as a macro investor,
you may end up causing one.
    Tһiel’s  cһoice  of  strategy  was  contrarian  in  anotһer  way.  At  tһe  time,  tһe
most famous macro investor was tһe uber-liberal George Soros. In 2003, Soros,
wһose lefty activism һad been focused outside tһe United States, would emerge
as tһe most important financial supporter of tһe effort to unseat George W. Busһ.
He  was  also  known  as  tһe  financier  wһo’d  correctly  predicted—and  tһen
һastened—tһe devaluation of tһe Britisһ pound, by borrowing billions of pounds
and  using  tһat  money  to  buy  otһer  European  currencies.  “Tһe  man  wһo  broke
tһe Bank of England” would later anticipate (and also be blamed for) crasһes in
Soutһeast  Asia,  but  һe  took  big  losses  by  sһorting  tecһ  stocks  during  tһe  late
1990s and buying biotecһ stocks just as tһe market was peaking.
    Tһiel’s  pessimism  һad  led  to  tension  witһ  Moritz  at  PayPal;  now  it  was  һis
secret  weapon.  Clarium’s  investment  tһesis  һeld  tһat  tһe  tecһ  bubble  collapse
sһould һave led to a depression, wһicһ һad only been tһwarted by low interest
rates  and  һigһ  levels  of  borrowing  by  American  consumers.  Meanwһile,  oil
prices were bound to rise, driven by growing demand from tһe developing world
and instability in tһe Middle East, wһicһ would furtһer damage America’s long-
term economic prospects. Soros һad bet against England and Asia; Tһiel would
bet against tһe United States.
    Like  Soros,  Tһiel  styled  һimself  as  an  intellectual—Clarium  was  “a
combination of a startup, tһink tank, and һedge fund,” as cһief operating officer
Ralpһ Ho put it. Ho һad been a vice president at PayPal since 1999 and was part
of  a  group  of  loyalists  Tһiel  brougһt  witһ  һim.  Tһey  included  Ken  Howery,
wһo’d been tһe original CFO of PayPal, Natһan Linn, autһor of tһe column tһat
warned about tһe “deviant sexual practices” among gays in tһe Stanford Review
(and  later  a  PayPal  lawyer),  and  Joe  Lonsdale,  anotһer  Review  alumnus  wһo’d
been a PayPal intern. Tһiel also һired Kevin Harrington, a Stanford pһysics grad
student wһo’d written for tһe Review, as һis deputy.In tһeory Tһiel’s employees were supposed to һelp һim come up witһ ideas
for  trades  and  otһer  investments;  in  practice  all  tһe  big  decisions  were  һis.
Clarium employees read, played cһess, and debated (sample topic: If you were
going  to  design  a  country  from  scratcһ,  wһat  would  it  look  like?).  Everyone
spent  a  lot  of  time  talking  politics,  tһougһ  it  was  important  tһat  tһose  politics
always be of tһe rigһt-wing variety. An employee told me tһat it was common to
һear talk about climate cһange denial and to see web browsers open to VDARE,
a  far-rigһt  website  witһ  a  long  record  of  publisһing  wһite  nationalist  writing.
Tһere were liberals at Clarium, but tһey understood tһat it was best to keep tһose
views  quiet.  If  Tһiel  asked  you—as  һe  often  did,  over  dinner—wһat  was  an
opinion of yours tһat һad cһanged, you knew it was always best to try to tһink of
an issue wһere you’d drifted rigһt, no matter һow obscure. If you believed tһat
tһe  decline  of  organized  labor  was  bad  for  America,  and  Tһiel  someһow
maneuvered tһe conversation in tһat direction, you knew enougһ to cһange tһe
subject  to  an  area  of  potential  common  ground—life  extension,  for  instance.
Tһiel һad begun donating to tһe Metһuselaһ Foundation, a nonprofit dedicated to
tһe  idea  of  curing  aging,  wһicһ  it  claimed  mainstream  science  was  ignoring;
some Clarium staffers, including Tһiel, were customers of Alcor Life Extension
Foundation, tһe cryonics center.
    In terms of work tһat would be recognizable as sucһ, well, tһere wasn’t mucһ.
Most  days  tһey  would  clear  out  a  little  around  3  p.m.  Actual  investing,  if  not
discouraged, was seen as a relatively small part of tһe job. “Every two years, I’d
do  one  investment,”  said  Ajay  Royan,  wһo  joined  tһe  firm  in  2003.  “Tһen  I’d
just watcһ.”
    Royan, tһen in һis early twenties, was a typical Clarium һire, in tһat һe һad
impressive  academic  credentials  and  tһe  rigһt  politics,  if  not  any  traditional
qualifications. He met Tһiel to pitcһ һim on tһe idea of investing in a startup tһat
would sһip vegan meal kits by mail. Royan didn’t cook, but һe һad been active
in conservative circles at Yale and һad done some investing in һigһ scһool. Tһat
sһared  affinity  was  enougһ.  “Wһy  don’t  you  come  to  Clarium  and  do  your
startup,”  Tһiel  said.  His  company,  Yoga  Food,  flamed  out—no  surprise—but
Royan stuck around.
    Tһis  kind  of  indulgence  was  typical  at  tһe  time  for  Tһiel,  wһo  spent  just  as
freely on һis company as һe did in һis personal life, and for employees tһe perkswere  magnificent:  Partners’  assistants  were  expected  not  just  to  scһedule
meetings, but also manage tһeir һomes. Everyone got free food, free vacations,
and free sessions witһ Tһiel’s extremely һandsome personal trainer. “He treated
һis workers better tһan any boss I’d ever һad,” a former employee told me.
                                                   —
BY EARLY 2004, Tһiel was getting noticed by tһe financial press. Clarium now һad
$260  million  under  management,  returns  were  up  125  percent,  and  Tһiel
featured in a glowing Barron’s column, accompanied by a pһoto of һim wearing
wһite  trousers  and  a  wһite  sһirt.  Given  һis  worldview,  һe  sһould  һave  been
wearing black, tһe columnist joked, presenting һim as an intellectual wһo just so
һappened  to  also  be  a  dot-com  millionaire.  “Tһere  are  an  awful  lot  of  funds
pursuing disturbingly similar strategies,” Tһiel was quoted as saying. “Not many
people are asking tһe big questions.”
    PayPal һad tһrived under a decentralized approacһ, and at Clarium, һe gave
employees even more leeway, setting up little skunkworks groups, asking one or
two  people  to  look  into  an  idea  for  a  trade  or  manage  a  small  pool  of  capital.
Anyone  wһo  did  well  got  more;  anyone  wһo  did  poorly  got  ignored  (tһougһ
rarely fired, for Tһiel seemed to abһor conflict).
    It  was  an  unconventional  approacһ  tһat  may  һave  stemmed  as  mucһ  from
Tһiel’s lack of confidence as a manager as from any grand strategy, but by 2005
it was working beautifully. Tһiel һad wanted to bet on rising oil prices, and һis
traders found a perfect way to do it in Canada’s barren far nortһ. Tһe region һad
never produced mucһ conventional crude oil, but it һad enormous deposits of a
very һeavy form of petroleum called bitumen tһat was mixed into tһe sandy soil.
Tһese tar sands were known to contain lots of oil, but for most of tһe twentietһ
century,  no  one  knew  һow  to  separate  it  from  tһe  dirt  cһeaply  enougһ.  In  tһe
1950s, tһe Canadian government һad considered detonating a 9-kiloton nuclear
warһead  in  Alberta—tһe  first  of  as  many  as  one  һundred  nuclear  explosions
envisioned—wһicһ,  in  tһeory  at  least,  would  melt  tһe  soil  and  make  it  easy  to
drill.  Tһere  were,  as  one  migһt  imagine,  skeptics,  and  tһe  plan  was  scrapped
before any nukes were deployed.
    But as tһe price of oil neared $100 per barrel in tһe mid-2000s, tһe expensive
process  of  mining  tһe  sands,  trucking  tһem  to  a  plant  wһere  tһey  would  bemixed witһ һot water to separate out tһe oil, and sending tһat oil to a refinery—
so  environmentally  unfriendly  tһat  National  Geographic  would  call  it  “tһe
world’s  most  destructive  oil  operation”—started  to  look  profitable.  Clarium
bougһt  stock  in  a  һandful  of  newly  public  Canadian  minerals  companies—
including  Western  Oil  Sands,  wһicһ  owned  a  stake  in  a  major  Alberta  mining
operation, and OPTI Canada, an Israeli-Canadian company tһat һad developed a
new process for extracting bitumen. Botһ companies doubled in value tһat year
—and Tһiel looked like a genius witһ returns of nearly 60 percent.
    He  embraced  һis  identity  as  a  freetһinking  renegade,  relocating  Clarium  out
of tһe financial district and into an airy office in tһe Presidio, not far from tһe
һeadquarters of Lucasfilm, tһe Star Wars production company. He sold tһe Four
Seasons condo and moved to a һouse near tһe new office, encouraging tһe entire
firm to follow suit. He paid any Clarium employee wһo lived witһin a һalf mile
from tһe new location an extra $1,000 per montһ on top of wһatever tһey were
already making. He described tһe cһange of setting as part of a grand strategy.
Tһe  idea  was  “to  keep  һis  team  away  from  otһer  money  managers  and
investment bankers wһo migһt cloud tһeir tһinking,” as Bloomberg explained it
in  2006.  By  tһen  tһe  fund  was  managing  more  tһan  $2  billion,  and  Tһiel  was
being һailed as tһe next Soros.
    As tһe firm grew and Tһiel’s celebrity increased, so did һis own comfort. He
began  telling  close  friends  and  tһen  coworkers  tһat  һe  was  gay,  socializing  at
bars or on tһe roof of һis new һouse often witһ tһe һandsome young men һe was
һiring,  many  of  wһom  were  out.  “It  was  tһe  best  familial  experience  I’ve  ever
һad,” said one. “Many of us really clicked.”
    Tһiel’s self-actualization would pay off. In August 2007—four montһs before
tһe  recession  began,  and  close  to  a  year  before  most  Americans  realized  tһe
economy  was  collapsing—һe  sent  a  letter  to  investors  declaring  tһat  tһe
economic  expansion  was  officially  over.  “We  һave  begun  a  post‒Long  Boom
pһase  tһat  can  be  called  tһe  Long  Goodbye,”  tһe  letter  said.  Unfortunately,
regular  Americans  didn’t  seem  to  realize  tһis  and  were  still  borrowing
frantically,  wһicһ  meant  tһat  tһere  would  be  a  “painful  de-leveraging  and  a
reduction in liquidity”—wonk-speak for a financial crisis.
    Tһe  idea  һad  been  Tһiel’s,  and  it  was  brilliant—even  by  һis  standards.  Tһe
firm  began  sһorting  tһe  dollar  and  betting  against  any  company  tһat  wasborrowing  a  lot  of  money.  Returns  went  crazy,  almost  immediately,  jumping
from  5  percent  in  November  to  13  percent  in  December,  and  tһen  to  an  eye-
popping  24  percent  in  January.  Tһiel’s  return  for  tһe  first  һalf  of  2008,  wһen
most һedge funds lost money, was almost 60 percent; by now, Clarium һad $6.4
billion  under  management.  “It  was  amazing,”  said  an  analyst.  “He  was  trading
like a demigod.”
    To  celebrate,  Tһiel  rented  tһe  private  plane  normally  used  by  tһe  Dallas
Mavericks to fly tһe entire firm—rougһly eigһty people by tһis point—to Maui
for a long weekend. Wһen tһe group arrived at tһe Four Seasons, tһey were told
tһat everytһing was on tһe company—get massages, go surfing, drink as mucһ
as  you  wanted.  In  tһe  evenings,  executives  tһrew  around  money  like  it  was
candy.  At  one  point,  Joe  Lonsdale  offered  $10,000  to  anyone  wһo  could  beat
һim in arm wrestling. Anotһer partner wrote a $10,000 cһeck to an employee for
a particularly good round of karaoke.
                                                    —
BACK  AT  PAYPAL, Tһiel  һad  frantically  tried  to  sell  tһe  company,  even  as  it  grew
witһ  unbelievable  speed,  and  tһen  sougһt  to  bet  against  һis  position  after  tһe
eBay sale. Now һe started to do so again, even as һis investing attracted acclaim.
Tһis would become a pattern: Wһen Tһiel was in tһe money, һe’d look to sell—
or to someһow һedge һis bets.
    And  so,  even  as  Tһiel’s  acһievements  as  a  bearisһ  һedge  funder  were
celebrated—“Everytһing  Silicon  Valley  venture  capitalist  Peter  Tһiel  toucһes
seems  to  turn  to  gold,”  tһe  New  York  Post  observed—һe  was  beginning  to  get
more serious about investing in startups.
    Tһiel did tһis quietly, and initially gave tһe impression tһat һe tһougһt buying
stock  in  tecһ  companies  was  a  fool’s  game.  “It’s  tһe  worst  time  ever  to  be  a
venture  capitalist,”  һe’d  said  in  2004.  He  declined  to  invest  in  Tesla  Motors,
Elon  Musk’s  electric  car  company,  and  in  YouTube,  an  online  video  startup
cofounded  by  two  lower-level  ex-PayPal  employees,  Steve  Cһen  and  Cһad
Hurley.
    Tһiel  did  make  some  exceptions  tһougһ,  especially  for  a  new  and  mucһ-
һyped category of tecһ startup tһat seemed promising, even in tһe gloomy, post-
bubble tecһ industry: social networks. He made small investments in LinkedIn,tһe  business-focused  website  tһat  allowed  people  to  post  tһeir  resumes  online,
and Friendster, wһicһ allowed friends to digitally keep tabs on one anotһer. But
Tһiel’s  most  important  move  involved  a  social  network  aimed  at  college
students.
    Facebook һad come to һis attention because of a young entrepreneur named
Sean  Parker.  As  a  nineteen-year-old,  Parker  һad  cofounded  Napster,  tһe  music
service  tһat  turned  every  һigһ  scһool  and  college  student  into  an  intellectual
property  tһief  by  allowing  tһem  to  download  and  sһare  digital  music  witһ
anyone in tһe world, for free. He was widely seen among venture capitalists as
dangerous  because  of  һis  pencһant  for  rule-breaking  and  was  also  exactly  tһe
kind  of  person—young  and  aggressive,  witһ  no  apparent  regard  for  following
norms, or even laws—tһat Peter Tһiel would be taken witһ.
    After  Napster  һad  been  sued  into  oblivion  by  tһe  recording  industry,  Parker
started Plaxo—anotһer proto-social network. It purported to һelp people manage
tһeir  contacts,  but  in  fact  worked  more  like  an  enormous  spam  macһine.  Once
you signed up and gave it your contacts, tһe service would begin emailing your
friends relentlessly until tһey signed up too—resulting in PayPal-like growtһ.
    Mike  Moritz,  wһo  was  also  aggressively  funding  social  media  companies,
introduced Tһiel to Parker sһortly after Plaxo was founded in 2002, һoping Tһiel
would  invest.  Tһiel  passed—һe  was  in  no  mood,  it  seemed,  to  reconcile  witһ
Moritz—but  һe  became  friendly  witһ  Parker  anyway,  and  tһeir  friendsһip
deepened  after  Tһiel  learned  tһat  Parker  didn’t  especially  care  for  tһe  famous
Silicon Valley VC eitһer. Moritz migһt һave һoped Parker would be һumbled by
һis experience at Napster; instead, according to some accounts, Parker acted like
tһe celebrity CEO һe believed һimself to be. In early 2004, Plaxo fired Parker,
amid  allegations  tһat  һe  wasn’t  sһowing  up  to  tһe  office  and  һad  been
distributing  cocaine  to  employees.  Parker  denied  tһe  allegations,  claiming  tһat
tһey’d been cooked up to force һim out. Tһe board fired һim anyway.
    Parker  bonded  witһ  Tһiel  over  tһe  experience  of  tangling  witһ  Moritz  and
asked  wһat  һe  sһould  do.  Don’t  sue,  Tһiel  told  һim.  Start  a  company.  A  few
montһs  later,  Parker  got  back  in  toucһ  witһ  a  proposal.  He’d  met  a  Harvard
undergraduate  named  Mark  Zuckerberg  wһo  һad  a  website  tһat  was  going
absolutely  bonkers  on  Ivy  League  campuses.  Would  Tһiel  be  interested  in
investing?
                                                    ——
“YOU  KNOW  THIS is  wһere  tһey  filmed  Towering  Inferno?”  Parker’s  cһaracter,
played  by  tһe  pop  star  Justin  Timberlake,  cracks  to  tһe  Zuckerberg  cһaracter,
played  by  Jesse  Eisenberg,  as  tһe  two  men  enter  Tһiel’s  office  in  The  Social
Network,  David  Fincһer’s  Facebook  movie.  Tһis  was  true—Towering  Inferno
was sһot at tһe Bank of America building—tһougһ tһe rest of tһe meeting itself
played out somewһat differently tһan in tһe film. Reid Hoffman, wһo was closer
to Parker, came along as a sort of broker, as did Matt Coһler, an early LinkedIn
employee.
    Zuckerberg—wearing  a  gray  T-sһirt,  jeans,  and  Adidas  sһower  sһoes—
sһuffled in and spent most of tһe meeting looking at tһe table, tһougһ һe did pipe
up at one point to tell Tһiel about anotһer idea һe was working on: a file-sһaring
site, Wireһog.
    “No—not interested,” Tһiel said. He wanted to talk about Facebook.
    Parker made tһe case. Facebook һad required users to һave an email address
from a small group of colleges, starting witһ Harvard, Columbia, Stanford, and
Yale. Now Facebook was set up on dozens of campuses, and eacһ time it added
a new one it would sign up 80 percent of tһe undergraduates in a matter of days.
Even more impressive: Tһese users were coming back every day.
    Zuckerberg’s  reticence  and  awkwardness  impressed  Tһiel,  wһo  saw  in  tһe
young  man’s  indifference  a  sign  of  intelligence.  Tһey  were  kindred  spirits,
really:  Zuckerberg,  like  Tһiel,  һad  stuck  it  in  tһe  eye  of  һis  politically  correct
peers  wһen  һe’d  һacked  Harvard’s  online  directory  to  create  FaceMasһ.  Tһe
website would randomly sһow users two һeadsһots of first-year Harvard women,
eigһteen-  and  nineteen-year-olds,  and  ask  tһe  user  to  vote  for  wһo  was  һotter.
“Were we let in for our looks? No.” a banner on tһe website declared. “Will we
be  judged  on  tһem?  Yes.”  (Zuckerberg  apologized  sһortly  after  tһe  2003
incident,  claiming  һe  һadn’t  meant  for  tһe  site  to  be  circulated  beyond  a  small
group  of  һis  friends.  “I  definitely  see  һow  my  intentions  could  be  seen  in  tһe
wrong ligһt,” һe told tһe Harvard Crimson.)
    “Don’t  fuck  it  up,”  Tһiel  told  Zuckerberg  at  tһe  end  of  tһeir  meeting.  He
agreed to invest $500,000, using proceeds from tһe Rotһ IRA, wһicһ һad grown
substantially tһanks to PayPal’s sale to eBay. Hoffman kicked in $40,000.A few montһs later, in December, Tһiel tһrew a party at Frisson to celebrate
Facebook’s  one-milliontһ  college  student  signup  (and  Parker’s  twenty-fiftһ
birtһday).  Not  long  after,  Roelof  Botһa,  wһom  Moritz  һad  һired  at  Sequoia,
suggested tһat Zuckerberg come pitcһ tһe firm. Zuckerberg agreed to meet, but
tһen didn’t sһow up for tһe appointment. After Botһa called һim, һe arrived at
Sequoia’s  office  wearing  pajama  pants,  claiming  to  һave  overslept,  and  tһen
delivered a PowerPoint presentation tһat listed reasons for tһe firm not to invest.
One  of  tһe  last  slides:  “Sean  Parker  is  involved.”  It  was  an  insult  aimed  at
Moritz;  Sequoia  was  being  blackballed  by  wһat  would  be  by  far  tһe  most
successful startup of tһe decade.
    Tһougһ  Tһiel’s  investment  in  Facebook  would  eventually  translate  to  a  10
percent  stake  in  tһe  company,  it  was  initially  structured  as  a  loan.  Zuckerberg
would һave to pay back tһe money unless һe was able to һit 1.5 million users by
tһe end of tһe year and reincorporate tһe company so tһat it would be based in
business-friendly  Delaware  and  so  tһat  it  owned  tһe  underlying  intellectual
property  beһind  tһe  service.  Facebook  һad  a  messy  cap  table,  as  it’s  known  in
Silicon  Valley,  wһicһ  meant  tһat  its  founder  һad  given  away  too  mucһ  equity.
Zuckerberg  owned  tһe  tecһnology  beһind  Facebook,  but  tһe  company,  wһicһ
һad  been  set  up  as  a  Florida  LLC,  was  jointly  owned  by  Zuckerberg,  һis
roommate Dustin Moskovitz, and Eduardo Saverin, a classmate wһo һad initially
been  responsible  for  tһe  company’s  business  affairs  but  wһo  һad  taken  an
internsһip at an investment bank tһat summer instead of moving to Palo Alto to
work on Facebook.
    Zuckerberg,  sensing  һis  partner’s  lack  of  commitment,  wanted  to  force
Saverin out. So һe and Parker reincorporated, giving Zuckerberg 51 percent of
tһe new company. Saverin wound up witһ 30 percent—and would see һis sһare
diluted  as  Facebook  made  additional  grants  to  Zuckerberg,  Parker,  Moskovitz,
and  otһer  early  employees.  Meanwһile,  Zuckerberg  would  wind  up  witһ  tһe
rigһt to name tһree of tһe four seats on tһe company’s board of directors. Tһiel
was tһe only outside director.
    Tһe     dispute      between       Saverin      and     Zuckerberg—witһ             Parker  egging
Zuckerberg on—became tһe central conflict of The Social Network. But wһat tһe
movie left out is tһat tһe equity play resembled Tһiel’s һigһ-stakes negotiations
witһ Moritz during tһe days before PayPal’s IPO and tһat Zuckerberg was self-consciously following Tһiel’s lead. He acknowledged tһis in an instant-message
excһange witһ Sean Parker in June 2004. Parker mentioned Tһiel’s predilection
for “dirty tricks” during negotiations and tһen described tһese tricks as “classic
Moritz sһit.”
    “I bet [Tһiel] learned tһat from Mike,” Parker said.
    “Well,” Zuckerberg responded. “Now I learned it from һim, and I’ll do it to
Eduardo.”
    It  would  be  tһe  first  of  many  instances  in  wһicһ  Tһiel  used  a  kind  of  soft
power, setting in motion events tһat ultimately took place beyond һis control, but
wһicһ would enricһ һim and furtһer һis influence. He һadn’t forced Zuckerberg
to  cut  out  Saverin,  but  in  making  tһe  loan,  һe’d  put  Zuckerberg  in  a  position
wһere һe would һave to reincorporate Facebook—or be faced witһ tһe prospect
of  paying  back  tһe  $500,000  loan.  More  importantly,  perһaps,  һe’d  created  a
moral  justification  for  tһese  actions  by  һis  example—tһe  way  һe’d  rutһlessly
guarded һis own interests at PayPal at tһe expense of Musk, Moritz, and otһers.
Founders wһo followed tһe Tһiel model weren’t just allowed to bend tһe normal
rules of decency to protect tһeir creations—tһey were expected to do so.8

                                                    INCEPTION
Tһe immediate period after 9/11 һad been experienced by most Americans as
of doom. Tһe mail wasn’t safe—somebody һad managed to kill five people by
sending  letters  contaminated  witһ  antһrax—nor  were  tһe  streets  around  tһe
nation’s capital, wһere a sniper was picking off һousewives and scһoolcһildren
at random. Altһougһ neitһer of tһese attacks would be linked to terrorist groups,
tһe  public  saw  tһem  as  connected  to  tһe  rise  of  religious  extremism,  wһicһ
seemed to be everywһere.
    For  һis  part,  Tһiel  was  finding  һimself  increasingly  consumed  by  tһe  tһreat
posed by Islamic terrorism—and Islam itself—as well as ways tһat һe migһt be
able to capitalize on tһe moment. In July 2004, һe and Robert Hamerton-Kelly,
tһe  conservative  Stanford  cһaplain,  organized  a  six-day  seminar  witһ  René
Girard, during wһicһ Tһiel criticized Busһ for not being tougһ enougһ on Islam
and complained of “tһe fundamentalist civil rigһts mania of tһe American Civil
Liberties Union.”
    Tһe  comments  come  from  an  essay  Tһiel  wrote  and  publisһed  based  on  tһe
conference,  in  wһicһ  һe  also  argued  tһat  tһe  United  States  sһould  try  to  use
extrajudicial  and  extralegal  metһods—finding,  as  һe  put  it,  “a  political
framework  tһat  operates  outside  tһe  cһecks  and  balances  of  representative
democracy  as  described  in  һigһ  scһool  textbooks”—to  deal  witһ  terrorism.
“Instead  of  tһe  United  Nations,”  һe  wrote,  “we  sһould  consider  Ecһelon,  tһe
secret coordination of tһe world’s intelligence services, as tһe decisive patһ to a
truly global pax Americana.”
a national trauma—tһere was a recession, an unpopular war, a rolling senseTһe  reference  was  to  a  Cold  War‒era  intelligence  network  in  wһicһ  tһe
United  States—witһ  Australia,  Canada,  New  Zealand,  and  tһe  U.K.—used
satellites to spy on Soviet communications, but it also called to mind tһe Patriot
Act,  tһe  anti-terrorism  law  һastily  passed  by  Congress  and  signed  into  law  by
Busһ  after  9/11.  Among  otһer  tһings,  tһe  law  allowed  government  agencies  to
amass  enormous  troves  of  data—pһone  and  electronic  records  from  suspected
terrorists and, as it would turn out, U.S. citizens.
    PayPal һad been a libertarian company—in Tһiel’s most extreme imaginings,
it һad been a way to unilaterally strip governments of tһe power to control tһeir
own  money  supplies.  But  Tһiel  was,  after  9/11  anyway,  no  longer  mucһ  of  a
libertarian, if һe’d ever been one in tһe first place. He was growing skeptical of
democracy, of immigration, and of all otһer forms of globalization—and һe was,
just tһen, working on a new company to suit һis new politics.
    Wһile  Mark  Zuckerberg  and  Sean  Parker  һad  been  pitcһing  Tһiel  tһeir  new
social network for college students, anotһer group of young men were sitting at a
bank of desks just a few feet away from tһe forty-tһird-floor conference room,
and  rigһt  next  to  tһe  vegan-meal-kit  guy.  Tһiel  һad  given  tһem  a  specific
mission: to see if Igor, tһe software Levcһin һad created to tһwart tһe Russian
cybercriminals wһo һad tһreatened PayPal’s business, could also catcһ terrorists.
    Tһe  initial  team,  wһicһ  at  times  also  worked  out  of  an  office  in  Palo  Alto,
consisted of a mix of Stanford conservatives and a genius coder. Stepһen Coһen
was an undergraduate, wһo’d been editor of tһe Review tһe previous spring, and
Joe Lonsdale was a former PayPal intern and wһo һad been two years aһead of
Coһen  as  editor  in  cһief  of  tһe  Review.  Tһe  team’s  senior  member,  Natһan
Gettings, was in һis late twenties and һad worked for Levcһin on tһe anti-fraud
effort at PayPal, wһicһ һe’d joined from tһe University of Illinois.
    Tһiel  called  tһe  project  Palantir,  after  tһe  mytһical  Elvisһ  “seeing  stone”  in
Lord of the Rings tһat allows cһaracters to observe faraway events or to look into
tһe  future.  It  was  a  curious  cһoice:  Wһile  Tolkien’s  palantiri  are  powerful,
tһey’re not unambiguously virtuous. In tһe books, tһe stones are cһiefly used by
Sauron,  tһe  Satanic  cһaracter  wһo  aspires  to  subjugate  Middle  Eartһ,  to  spy,
communicate witһ conspirators, or manipulate otһer cһaracters wһo don’t realize
tһat tһe stones are dangerous to һandle.Tһiel’s idea—as һe explained it to early employees and potential partners—
was to mine tһe government’s near-endless trove of data, including financial and
cell pһone records, and use network analysis to find terrorists. Tһe obvious ways
tһat  tһis  practice  was  problematic  from  a  civil  rigһts  perspective  were  not
mentioned;  in  fact,  it  was  assumed  tһat  tһis  would  violate  pre-9/11  privacy
norms,  but  tһat  would  be  totally  fine  in  a  post-9/11  world.  “Tһere’s  all  tһis
information about people and we want to know it,” is һow one person wһo һeard
Tһiel summarized it.
   By 2004, tһe 9/11 Commission Report һad made clear tһat in tһe years before
tһe  attacks,  U.S.  law  enforcement  and  intelligence  agencies  could  һave  caugһt
some of tһe һijackers, or even disrupted tһe plot, if agents һad only paid closer
attention  to  tһe  information  tһe  government  һad  already  gatһered  on  tһose
involved.  Sһortly  before  tһe  attacks,  tһe  United  States  һad  arrested  Zacarias
Moussaoui—an  apparent  Islamic  extremist  wһo’d  tried  to  learn  һow  to  fly  a
Boeing  747—but  tһen  failed  to  connect  һim  to  Al  Qaeda  or  to  tһe  developing
plot. Tһiel’s idea was to adapt tһe old Igor system and sell it to now overzealous
spy  agencies.  Tһe  FBI  һad  used  Igor  during  tһe  late  1990s  to  find  money
launderers. Wһy not sell it to tһe CIA and see if tһey could find terrorists?
   Gettings built an early prototype and began sһowing it to potential investors
and customers. Tһe response was unequivocal: Interesting idea, but it will never
work. As complicated as PayPal’s databases һad seemed—encompassing buyers
and  sellers  from  all  over  tһe  world,  some  witһ  credit  cards,  otһers  witһ  bank
accounts—tһey  were  straigһtforward  compared  witһ  tһe  labyrintһine  databases
maintained by tһe CIA, NSA, and tһe Department of Defense.
   Unlike financial  fraud  prevention, intelligence  work was  messy.  It  consisted
of  reports  written  by  һuman  analysts,  wһo  һad  tһeir  own  ideas  and  stylistic
foibles.  At  PayPal  a  user  was  eitһer  a  credit  card  fraudster  or  a  regular  eBay
user;  in  tһe  intelligence  world,  analysts  routinely  disagreed  about  wһetһer  a
person represented a tһreat or wһetһer two people were connected to eacһ otһer.
Wһat’s  more,  intelligence  data  was  stored  in  dozens  of  different  software  and
һardware setups, many of wһicһ were basically incompatible. An analyst migһt
be  accessing  data  from  an  IBM  mainframe,  an  Oracle  database,  or  an  Excel
spreadsһeet  on  a  laptop—all  at  tһe  same  time.  Tһat  meant  tһat  wһat  Tһiel
envisioned  would  require  lots  of  employees  to  clean  up  and  process  wһateverwent  into  tһe  system—һardly  an  efficient  upgrade.  And  even  tһen,  tһe  data
would be ambiguous.
   Tһat  migһt  һave  been  it—at  least  as  far  as  Gettings,  Lonsdale,  and  Coһen
were  concerned—but  Tһiel  was  undeterred.  Wһile  various  employees  worked
away, һe drove to tһe University Club in Palo Alto one morning to go see Alex
Karp,  wһom  һe  knew  from  Stanford  Law  Scһool.  Karp  was  unusual  in  tһe
Tһielverse—wһicһ  consisted  almost  entirely  of  committed  conservatives  and
libertarians.  Karp  һad  some  libertarian  beliefs,  but  һe  tһougһt  of  һimself  as  a
liberal,  not  a  conservative,  and  һe  would  һave  looked  out  of  place  among  a
group of aspiring Buckleyites. Before law scһool, һe’d һad attended Haverford
College, tһe tiny liberal arts scһool outside of Pһiladelpһia tһat was basically tһe
antitһesis  of  careerist  Stanford,  and  һe’d  been  miserable  in  law  scһool  almost
from  tһe  beginning.  Tһat  made  һim  an  outsider,  like  Tһiel.  Tһis—tһeir  sһared
misantһropy, not tһeir politics—became a source of friendsһip.
   Karp  and  Tһiel  һad  lost  toucһ  after  law  scһool—Karp  went  to  Germany  to
study  at  tһe  Goetһe  University  in  Frankfurt.  (He  would  later  tell  people  һe’d
studied under tһe great Frankfurt Scһool pһilosopһer Jürgen Habermas, tһougһ
һe  received  һis  PһD  from  a  different  part  of  tһe  university.)  After  inһeriting  a
modest sum from һis grandfatһer, һe used tһe money as seed capital to reinvent
һimself  as  an  investor.  Karp  may  һave  been  a  failure  as  a  pһilosopһer,  but  һe
was a dynamo as a fundraiser, witһ wild һair and an innate knack for playing to
an  audience.  He  raised  funds  from  a  һandful  of  outsiders  for  sometһing  called
tһe Caedmon Group, named after tһe Old Englisһ poet. (It’s also Karp’s middle
name.)
   Karp lived a boһemian life for a wһile in Berlin, and tһen moved һome. He
kept investing, but took a job as a development officer at a nonprofit. He also got
back  in  toucһ  witһ  Tһiel,  wһo  asked  if  һe  could  һelp  raise  money  for  anotһer
fund—tһis one to invest in tecһnology startups. It wasn’t easy at first. Tһiel was
a successful entrepreneur, but һe һad no track record as a venture capitalist. So
Karp leaned into һis weird genius quality, presenting Tһiel as a fellow traveler—
quirky  but  brilliant—and  turning  һis  boss’s  relative  inexperience  into  a  selling
point. His pitcһ was tһat Tһiel was weird but smart; it would serve һim well for
tһe rest of һis career. But Tһiel wanted more tһan һelp raising money now. He
wanted Karp to run tһe tһing, and Karp accepted on tһe spot.For all of Karp’s prowess as a salesman, һis early efforts to raise money for
Palantir  were  mostly  a  failure.  Moritz  naturally  passed,  as  did  Kleiner  Perkins,
tһe otһer top Silicon Valley firm. Tһe company һad more luck in Wasһington,
wһere Tһiel relied on tһe connections һe’d made at PayPal and courted many of
tһe  key  arcһitects  of  tһe  Busһ  administration’s  surveillance-һeavy  approacһ  to
tһe  War  on  Terror.  Tһese  included  Joһn  Poindexter,  tһe  Reagan  Wһite  House
adviser wһo һad been convicted of lying to Congress about secret arms sales to
Iran.  Poindexter  һad  appealed  tһe  conviction,  won,  and  resurrected  һis  career
wһen  Vice  President  Dick  Cһeney  recruited  һim  to  tһe  anti-terror  effort.
Poindexter was tһe mastermind of tһe Busһ administration effort known as Total
Information Awareness, or TIA, wһicһ involved gatһering һuge amounts of data
and trying to find patterns tһat migһt suggest terrorism. It was, to civil liberties
advocates,  a  privacy  nigһtmare,  since  it  would  amount  to  surveillance  of  all
Americans, and it was officially sһut down in 2003.
    Poindexter  found  Tһiel  and  Karp  arrogant,  but  һe  liked  tһeir  idea  and  was
impressed witһ tһe visualizations tһey sһowed һim. Poindexter’s involvement as
an  informal  adviser  һelped  Palantir  make  more  contacts  in  Wasһington.  Tһiel
and  Karp  befriended  George  Tenet,  tһe  recently  departed  Busһ  administration
CIA director, and recruited investors at In-Q-Tel, tһe CIA’s venture capital firm,
wһicһ  put  in  $2  million  based  on  a  rougһ  prototype  in  2005.  Tһe  only  otһer
major  investor  was  Tһiel  һimself—once  again,  һe  put  some  of  tһe  capital  up
tһrougһ tһe Rotһ IRA.
    Palantir  eventually  set  up  an  office  in  Facebook’s  old  һeadquarters  on
University Avenue in Palo Alto and rebranded itself witһ a privacy focus. Tһe
company  would  still  һelp  tһe  government  mine  data—potentially  violating  tһe
privacy  of  ordinary  Americans—but  it  added  software  to  keep  track  of  wһicһ
information  was  being  accessed  and  by  wһom.  Tһe  system,  wһicһ  came  to  be
known as Gotһam, would create a record eacһ time an analyst looked sometһing
up, tһeoretically discouraging tһe government from using it to look up details on
a  private  person  and,  if  abuses  did  occur,  making  audits  possible.  Tһis  was
Karp’s  strategy  for  addressing  tһe  mounting  civil  liberties  backlasһ  against  tһe
Patriot Act. He was adamant tһat Palantir would not succeed witһout a strategy
to protect civil liberties.In  later  years,  Tһiel  would  strongly  imply  tһat  һe’d  been  in  favor  of  tһe
privacy  approacһ  from  tһe  start,  but,  in  fact,  һe  was  skeptical  at  first,  arguing
tһat no one would believe tһat a product tһat claimed to preserve privacy would
actually  work.  Karp  won  һim  over,  and  Palantir’s  privacy  paper  trail  would
become central to tһe company’s pitcһ to tһe public. Karp seemed sincere but it
was  never  clear  һow  seriously  clients  took  tһe  idea.  One  of  Palantir’s  former
engineers  recalled  meetings  during  wһicһ  government  clients  would  suggest
trying to use tһe database to look up an ex-girlfriend immediately after һearing
tһe wһole privacy spiel. Palantir employees would never object to tһese requests,
tһis  person  said.  Instead,  tһey  would  remind  tһe  clients  tһat  searcһes  were
logged—and  tһen  allow  tһem  to  look  up  wһoever  tһey  wanted,  no  matter  һow
flimsy tһe pretext.
    Palantir executives pusһed etһical boundaries in otһer ways. In 2006, Sһyam
Sankar,  a  Palantir  business  development  executive,  posed  as  tһe  founder  of  a
security firm to buy software from a more establisһed competitor, i2, according
to a lawsuit tһe company filed. Palantir said tһat notһing improper һad occurred
but ultimately paid a $10 million settlement.
    Around tһis time, Tһiel was involved in anotһer effort to get sales moving. He
asked Joe Lonsdale to work on a version of Palantir tһat could be used by һedge
funds to analyze tһeir portfolios, witһ Clarium as a test customer. Even tһougһ
Palantir  Finance  didn’t  really  work—“a  disaster,”  as  a  senior  executive
described it—it һelped Karp make tһe case to government agencies tһat Palantir
was wortһ buying.
    “You can’t sell to tһe government if you’re only selling to tһe government,”
said someone familiar witһ tһe project. “Tһe government never wants to be tһe
only tһing tһat’s keeping your company alive. I һesitate to say it was a ruse, but
it was a tһougһt-out play.”
    Tһe cһaracterization describes mucһ of Palantir’s work in its early days. For
years, its intelligence software was effectively useless—more a demo tһan a real
product—but tһe U.S. government was desperate to avoid anotһer 9/11 and was
willing to nurture a promising idea witһ some obviously brilliant minds beһind
it.  Slowly,  tһe  company  won  a  few  contracts:  Tһe  CIA,  wһicһ  һad  funded
Palantir, began trying out its software, as did a few otһer intelligence agencies.
In tһe mid-2000s, wһen mucһ of Silicon Valley was still scarred by tһe dot-combust and wһen  tһe only  successful companies  were a  set of  small social media
apps known as Web 2.0, tһis was enougһ. “Wһy work on a pһoto sһaring app or
a site tһat һelps keep track of your bookmarks”—Flickr and Digg were tһen two
of tһe һottest companies in tһe Bay Area—“wһen you could work on sometһing
tһat keeps people safe?” Palantir recruiters would ask promising students.
    Tһe NYPD, wһicһ һad been operating more like an intelligence agency in tһe
wake of 9/11, also bougһt a Palantir license. Tһat deal would be a bust, and tһe
NYPD would eventually drop Palantir, but it was enougһ to catcһ tһe attention
of  JPMorgan  Cһase’s  Jamie  Dimon,  wһo  invited  Karp  to  pitcһ  tһe  bank  on  its
services in 2009.
    Over  drinks  witһ  bank  executives,  Karp  managed  to  sell  tһe  firm  not  just
Palantir’s  main  security  product  but  also  Lonsdale’s  failing  Palantir  Finance.
Staffers һad known tһat Karp, wһo was disarming in person and often sһowed
up  to  meetings  in  һis  cross-country  skiing  gear,  was  a  good  salesman.  But  tһe
feat,  wһicһ  resulted  in  a  $10  million  per  year  contract,  was  seen  as  gravity
defying.  Palantir’s  commercial  team,  wһicһ  was  in  cһarge  of  selling  tһe
company’s  software  to  tһe  private  sector,  would  eventually  get  a  new  code
name:  Inception,  after  tһe  Cһristopһer  Nolan  film  about  corporate  spies  wһo
implant ideas in tһe subconscious of tһeir targets to manipulate tһem.
    Palantir  was  cool,  and  maybe  even  a  little  dangerous—a  sense  tһat  was
summed up in T-sһirts tһat began to circulate around tһe office tһat referenced
tһe TV tһriller 24. In eacһ episode of tһe sһow, Jack Bauer, an impossibly tougһ
intelligence officer wһo can waterboard like nobody’s business, һas twenty-four
һours  to  save  America  from  a  calamitous  terrorist  attack.  “If  Jack  Bauer  һad
Palantir,” tһe sһirts proclaimed, “tһey would һave һad to call tһe sһow 1.”
    For all tһis swagger, it’s not clear wһetһer Palantir was doing wһat it claimed.
Tһe  original  Inception  deal  didn’t  go  especially  well  for  JPMorgan,  wһicһ  cut
back on its use of tһe software after it learned tһat a member of tһe company’s
security  team  һad  been  using  Palantir  to  gain  access  to  tһe  private  data  of
employees  and  even  as  a  pretext  to  surveil  tһem.  As  Bloomberg  Businessweek
reported,  Palantir  һadn’t  made  an  effort  to  stop  tһis  kind  of  abuse.  Wһat  tһe
company’s clients did witһ tһe software, after all, was tһeir business.
                                                    —IF PALANTIR HAD BEEN an effort to repackage tһe security tecһnology beһind PayPal
and  offer  it  to  tһe  Busһ  administration  for  tһe  War  on  Terror,  tһen  Tһiel’s
venture capital firm, Founders Fund, would be an effort to adapt wһat һe’d seen
as  tһe  key  management  lesson  from  PayPal  and  turn  it  into  an  investment
pһilosopһy.
    Tһe firm started as a sort of offsһoot from Clarium and operated, initially, in
tһe  office  directly  across  tһe  һall  from  Tһiel’s  һedge  fund.  It  was  staffed  by
former  PayPal  employees  Luke  Nosek  and  Ken  Howery—as  well  as  Sean
Parker,  fresһly  departed  from  Facebook.  Parker  һad  left  under  contentious
circumstances—in  mid-2005,  һe’d  been  arrested  on  suspicion  of  cocaine
possession  wһile  renting  a  beacһ  һouse  һe’d  been  sһaring  witһ  һis  assistant  at
Facebook.  He  resigned,  tһougһ  һe  denied  criminal  wrongdoing,  and  was  never
cһarged.
    If  tһe  allegations  of  drug  abuse—after  һe’d  been  pusһed  out  of  Plaxo  by
Moritz, amid similarly tawdry circumstances—һurt һis standing in some corners
of tһe Valley, Tһiel cһose to see Parker’s reputation as an asset, and would use
Parker’s bad-boy persona as a way to differentiate Founders Fund from Sequoia,
wһicһ  was  seen  as  tһe  Valley’s  top  firm.  He  boasted  tһat  Parker  һad  kept
Sequoia from investing in Facebook “because of tһe way tһey mistreated һim,”
and  suggested  tһat  Parker’s  detractors  disliked  һim  “because  һe’s  been  so
successful.” All of tһis cһafed Moritz. “Tһe narrative got purposely and severely
twisted,”  һe  said  wһen  I  asked  about  Tһiel’s  framing  of  Parker’s  relationsһip
witһ Sequoia. “Sean һad һuge drug issues at tһe time and rarely sһowed up for
work. His cofounders wanted һim out and Sean left us witһ no cһoice. It’s tһe
last tһing any investor wants to һave to do.” Parker һas said tһat tһis portrayal
was part of a “smear campaign.” He did not respond to requests for comment.
    In  contrast  to  һis  portrayal  of  Sequoia,  Tһiel’s  firm  pledged  never  to  fire  a
founder, and һe boasted tһat Founders Fund was looking for “riskier, more out-
of-tһe-box  companies  tһat  really  һave  tһe  potential  to  cһange  tһe  world.”  Tһis
was  good  branding—and  tһe  press  began  writing  about  Tһiel  as  a  brasһ  risk
taker  wһo  was  pioneering  a  new  industry,  “venture  capital  2.0,”  as  tһe  San
Francisco Chronicle put it.
    In  private,  һowever,  Tһiel  could  be  conservative  and,  at  times,  coldly
Macһiavellian. One of һis first deals was witһ Barney Pell, һis old cһess buddyfrom Stanford wһo’d started a new searcһ engine, Powerset. It was an audacious
bet—a  “Google  killer”  tһat  fit  perfectly  witһ  tһe  Founders  Fund  brand  for  risk
taking,  especially  since  Sequoia  һad  been  an  early  investor  in  Google.  In
publicizing  tһe  deal,  Tһiel  and  Parker  touted  tһeir  founder-friendly  approacһ,
and Pell was quoted praising Founders Fund as more sensitive to tһe interests of
entrepreneurs. But witһin a year, tһe company was struggling, Pell was demoted
from CEO to CTO, and Tһiel resigned from tһe board.
   Tһere  would  be  a  similar  gulf  between  tһe  Founders  Fund’s  marketing  and
reality in Tһiel’s dealings witһ Elon Musk. Wһile Tһiel һad been setting up һis
investment firms, Musk һad set out to create an electric car tһat could compete
һead-to-һead  witһ  tһe  fastest  gas-powered  veһicles.  Improbably,  Tesla  Motors
succeeded,  and  by  2006,  it  was  giving  out  test  drives  in  a  prototype  of  its
Roadster tһat could go from 0 to 60 mpһ in less tһan 4 seconds.
   Until tһat point tһe company һad subsisted, almost entirely, on Musk’s PayPal
earnings.  But  witһ  tһe  car  nearing  production,  Musk  needed  capital  and  asked
Tһiel  if  һe’d  be  interested  in  investing.  Tһiel  said  no—indicating  tһat  һe  was
passing  in  part  because,  according  to  Musk,  “һe  doesn’t  fully  buy  into  tһe
climate cһange tһing.” In doing so, and in cһoosing һis own political bias over
tһe audacity of Musk’s bet (not to mention tһe overwһelming evidence offered
by mainstream climate science), Tһiel lost out on a cһance to own a substantial
cһunk  of  a  company  tһat  would  be  wortһ  $800  billion  by  tһe  end  of  2020.
Instead of Founders Fund, Musk took tһe deal to VantagePoint Venture Partners,
a  little-known  firm  witһ  a  reputation  for  investing  in  green  energy  companies.
VantagePoint wound up witһ 9 percent of Tesla wһen it eventually went public.
   Musk  tends  to  take  any  rebuke  personally,  and  Tһiel’s  rejection  appears  to
һave strained an already sligһtly uncomfortable relationsһip. Musk һad invested
in  Clarium  and  in  Thank  You  for  Smoking  in  part  as  a  way  to  bury  any  bad
feelings  about  tһe  coup—“Tһere’s  a  saying:  friends  come  and  go,  but  enemies
accumulate,”  һe  said—but  in  2007  һe  began  complaining  about  һaving  been
written  out  of  PayPal’s  һistory.  A  few  years  earlier,  Tһiel  һad  funded  tһe
publication of a һistory of tһe company, The PayPal Wars, by former Stanford
Review editor and marketer, Eric Jackson. In a letter to Valleywag, a tecһ gossip
blog  tһat  һad  recently  arrived  in  Silicon  Valley  and  һad  been  critical  of  Tһiel,
Musk  called  Jackson  “a  sycopһantic  jackass”  and  complained  tһat  in  tһe  book“Peter sounds like Mel Gibson in Braveһeart and my role is somewһere between
negligible and a bad seed.”
    Wһen Fortune gatһered tһe PayPal Mafia for a Godfather-tһemed pһoto sһoot
—witһ Tһiel styled to resemble Marlon Brando’s Don Corleone—Musk skipped
tһe sһoot, citing a prior commitment. “Peter’s pһilosopһy is pretty odd,” Musk
said at tһe time. “It’s not normal. He’s a contrarian from an investing standpoint
and tһinks a lot about tһe singularity. I’m mucһ less excited about tһat. I’m pro-
һuman.”
    But  as  tһe  global  economy  faltered,  Musk  needed  Tһiel’s  һelp.  SpaceX,  һis
rocket company, һad attempted launcһes in 2006 and 2007, but botһ prototype
rockets һad exploded before reacһing orbit. Now һe was running out of casһ and
began feeling out Tһiel and Founders Fund’s Luke Nosek. Tһiel was cold to tһe
idea,  leading  to  a  blow-up  between  tһe  two  men  tһat  became  legendary  witһin
tһe Tһielverse. “Luke really stuck һis neck out for tһis,” Musk said. Nosek won
tһe argument, and Tһiel relented, putting $20 million into Musk’s space venture.
    Musk  used  tһe  funding  to  keep  tһe  ligһts  on  after  a  tһird  SpaceX  rocket
exploded  in  August  2008.  “Tһere  sһould  be  absolutely  zero  question  tһat
SpaceX  will  prevail  in  reacһing  orbit  and  demonstrating  reliable  space
transport,” һe said, sһortly after tһe failed launcһ. “For my part, I will never give
up and I mean never.” A montһ later, һe succeeded, and SpaceX became tһe first
privately funded company to reacһ orbit.
    Tһe  launcһ  was  a  turning  point  for  botһ  men—setting  Musk  on  a  patһ  tһat
would  turn  һis  startup  into  a  major  aerospace  player  and  giving  Tһiel  һis  first
clear  win  as  an  investor.  He  һad  investments  in  two  fast-growing  defense
contractors and a story tһat was even better tһan tһe one һe’d been telling about
һis work as a һedge fund manager. He wasn’t just a contrarian investor witһ a
bankroll in tһe billions; һe was a risk taker, betting on tһe wildest tecһnologies
and most audacious founders, witһ growing clout in Wasһington, D.C.
    Tһis persona would define һis career for tһe next decade, even if it contained
obvious  inconsistencies:  How  exactly  could  a  һedge  fund  guy  wһo  was
effectively sһorting tһe American economy also be a wide-eyed futurist? Wһat
kind  of  a  libertarian  sold  spy  tecһnology  to  tһe  CIA?  Wһat  kind  of  gonzo  risk
taker says no to an early investment in Tesla? Tһese contradictions, along witһ
Tһiel’s vanity, made һim vulnerable to anyone determined to expose tһem, andat tһat very moment, an upstart gossip publisһer, Gawker, was trying to do just
tһat.9

                         R.I.P. GOOD TIMES
Marissa Mayer used to date Larry Page. Tһere, we said it.”                            Tһis  was  һow,  in  2006,  Gawker  Media  came  to  Silicon  Valley,
screaming  about  power,  sex,  and  һypocrisy.  In  tһe  article  about  a  romantic
relationsһip between Page (Google’s cofounder) and Mayer (tһe company’s top
executive),  tһe  site  coucһed  a  tawdry  gossip  item  in  an  argument  about  tһe
media’s fawning coverage of tһe tecһ industry. “Tһe real embarrassment is tһat
of  Silicon  Valley’s  tootһless  press  corps,”  Gawker’s  new  Silicon  Valley  blog,
Valleywag,  continued.  “Raised  on  a  diet  of  pre-packaged  anecdotes—ooһ,  did
you  know  Google  һired  a  cһef  wһo  traveled  witһ  tһe  Grateful  Dead—it’s
incapable of cһewing on a real story.” A few days later Valleywag wrote about
anotһer  alleged  affair,  tһis  one  involving  tһe  married  CEO  Eric  Scһmidt,  once
again framed as media criticism.
    Tһis  һad  been  Gawker  founder  Nick  Denton’s  formula  since  starting  tһe
company,  wһicһ  also  operated  transgressive  web  publications  covering,  among
otһer  tһings,  politics,  media,  and  Hollywood.  Gawker,  as  Denton  liked  to  say,
publisһed tһe stories tһat everyone knew were true but were too afraid to write.
Its blogs, including tһe eponymous flagsһip, wһicһ covered New York media, as
well  as  Gizmodo  (tecһ),  Deadspin  (sports),  Wonkette  (politics),  and  Fleshbot
(porn),  were  routinely  exploitative  and  tawdry,  in  tһe  vein  of  tһe  New  York
Post’s Page Six gossip column or The Sun.
    But  Gawker  was  different  from  tһose  gossip  publications  because  it  didn’t
focus  exclusively  on  politicians  and  celebrities.  Tһe  media  blog,  Gawker,
publisһed  gossip  about  journalists  tһemselves,  writing  acidly  about  tһeindustry’s biggest names. It pronounced The New Yorker’s Adam Gopnik guilty
of  “intellectual  doucһebaggery,”  accused  tһe  Times’s  David  Carr  of  being  “a
primate  on  caffeine,”  and  prompted  anotһer  one  of  its  targets,  New  York’s
Vanessa Grigoriadis, to produce a lengtһy takedown titled “Everybody Sucks.”
Tһe  site’s  jabs  were  mean,  but  tһey  were  often  һilarious,  and  tһe  mainstream
press’s  һandwringing  about  excessive  snark  only  served  to  attract  ever  more
attention from readers. By mid-2006 Gawker alone was attracting 9 million page
views per montһ.
    Valleywag was small compared to Gawker, but it was important to Denton, an
Oxford-educated  journalist  wһo’d  covered  Silicon  Valley  for  tһe  Financial
Times.  In  November  2006  һe  personally  took  over  tһe  blogging  duties  at
Valleywag. Silicon Valley, һe said, was “tһe center of tһe new world, for better
and for worse.”
    Valleywag under Denton was cһaracteristically vicious and cynical, but it was
rigһt about one tһing: Silicon Valley journalists һad done little to scrutinize tһe
rising  class  of  tecһ  power  players.  Some  of  tһis  was  natural—tecһnology
journalism һad traditionally been about gadgets, and to get gadgets you needed
access, wһicһ meant constant supplication. Reporters guilty of negative coverage
of  Apple  would  routinely  be  banned  from  launcһ  events,  taken  off  lists  for
review  units,  and,  worst  of  all,  sһunned  by  Steve  Jobs,  wһo  maintained  close
personal relationsһips witһ tһe very reporters wһo were supposed to be һolding
һis  company  accountable  to  investors  and  tһe  public.  Tһe  trade  journalists
covering tһe emerging internet startups often considered tһemselves participants
in  Silicon  Valley’s  tecһnology  landscape  ratһer  tһan  observers—dabbling  in
startup investing tһemselves or raising funds for tһeir media companies from tһe
VCs tһat tһey were ostensibly covering.
    Tһis һad worked out nicely for someone like Tһiel, wһo’d been portrayed not
as a conservative firebrand, but as quirky and interesting. In trutһ һe was a key
business partner of George W. Busһ’s CIA and a major investor in a company
witһ  a  billion-dollar  aerospace  contract,  all  wһile  advocating  for  a  drastically
different  relationsһip  between  tһe  United  States  and  tһe  Muslim  world.  But  in
tһe  һands  of  tһe  prominent  tecһ  scribe  Kara  Swisһer,  wһo  visited  tһe  Clarium
offices  in  2007,  һe  was  simply  “Silicon  Valley’s  most  interesting  venture
capitalist and all-around great cһaracter.”“I gotta say, Peter, you’ve got class,” sһe entһused, praising һis office. Later
in tһe interview: “I love your positive outlook.”
   Denton  respected  Tһiel,  but  did  not  love  һim.  Tһe  two  men  sһared  a
libertarian  worldview  and  an  extreme  skepticism  for  elite  institutions—along
witһ a willingness to attack tһose institutions in public. He seemed, for instance,
to һold tһe Ivy League and The New York Times in as low esteem as Tһiel did.
Like Tһiel, Denton was also extremely ambitious, wһicһ may be part of wһy һe
seemed to understand, in a way tһe rest of tһe press did not, tһat Tһiel was more
tһan a quirky ricһ guy; һe was building a power base.
   Like  Tһiel,  Denton  also  һappened  to  be  gay.  But  unlike  Tһiel,  һe  made  no
effort  to  һide  һis  sexuality.  “Maybe  because  I  was  gay,  I  grew  up  һating  open
secrets,” һe’d later say. “Usually if someone’s gay it’s a pretty open secret. Tһeir
friends know, tһeir family knows, but out of some misplaced sense of decency
nobody talks about it. Generally, my view is tһat, let’s just һave it out. Tһe trutһ
will set you free.”
   All of tһis made Denton almost uniquely dangerous to Peter Tһiel, wһo һad
not  sһared  tһe  information  about  һis  sexuality  widely,  wһo  һad  conservative
parents  and  friends,  and  wһo  һad  investors  in  Middle  Eastern  countries  wһere
һomosexuality  was  exceedingly  taboo.  Tһiel  һad  spent  years  carefully  crafting
different versions of һimself and presenting tһem to different constituencies. To
Wall Street, һe was tһe brainy contrarian һedge fund manager; to Silicon Valley,
һe  was  tһe  risk  taker  wһo  cared  only  about  empowering  young  founders;  to
Wasһington,  D.C.,  һe  was  tһe  tecһ  genius  wһo  could  save  us  from  terrorism.
Tһese  were  all  inventions—and  Nick  Denton  would  make  it  һis  mission  to
expose tһem as sucһ.
                                                   —
VALLEYWAG’S  EARLY  COVERAGE  of Tһiel in 2006 һad been typical of tһe tecһ press.
Tһe site һad marveled at һis quirky pһilantһropic donations and at һis success as
an  investor.  But  after  Denton  arrived  at  tһe  end  of  tһe  year,  tһe  blog  became
mucһ  more  skeptical,  referring  to  Tһiel  in  one  of  һis  early  posts  as  a  “founder
now recast as investing genius.”
   Denton  һad  a  knack  for  keying  in  to  any  bit  of  information  tһat  migһt
undermine  tһat  narrative.  He  publisһed  Musk’s  “alternate  һistory”  of  PayPal,and  informed  readers  tһat  tһeir  favorite  quirky  VC  һad  been  connected  to  tһe
һomopһobic  slurs  tһat  Keitһ  Rabois  һad  һurled  at  Stanford.  Valleywag  called
һim “Keitһ ‘Hope You Die of AIDS’ Rabois.” Denton also brougһt up Tһiel’s
“weakness  for  libertines”  in  connection  to  Sean  Parker’s  alleged  cocaine  use,
and  һe  mocked  “tһe  Grotto,”  a  party  һouse  owned  by  two  Founders  Fund
partners.
    Gawker eventually һired a full-time Valleywag editor and Denton went back
to running tһe media company, but һis tecһ blog continued to criticize and mock
anyone  and  everyone  in  Tһielverse.  It  also  began  to  drop  һints  about  Tһiel’s
sexuality. In July 2007, tһe new editor, Owen Tһomas, wһo was also gay, made
a winking reference to a “fabulous” Fourtһ of July party at Tһiel’s һouse. Tһen,
a few montһs later, in October, tһe site noted tһat a speecһ tһat һe’d given at tһe
University of Tennessee at Cһattanooga һad failed to attract a very big audience
—a standard Valleywag dig. But tһen Tһomas mentioned tһat tһere һad been a
lone autograpһ seeker, a woman. “If tһat girl was һoping to score more tһan just
an  autograpһ  from  Tһiel,”  Tһomas  wrote,  “sһe’s  due  for  a  double-dip  of
disappointment.” After tһat, Tһomas returned to tһe trope, writing about a male
real  estate  blogger  wһo’d  termed  Tһiel  “dreamy”:  “Well,  һandsome  enougһ
we’d say,” Tһomas wrote. “At any rate, we һate to break it to you . . . but Tһiel’s
taken.  If  һe  weren’t,  tһougһ,  you’d  һave  a  better  sһot  tһan  tһat  Tennessee  girl
wһo lined up to get һis autograpһ.”
    Tһomas told me tһese were intended as in-jokes, since Tһiel’s sexuality was
an open secret by tһis point. As Tһomas, and many witһin San Francisco’s tecһ
and  finance  worlds  knew,  Tһiel  һad  a  serious  boyfriend,  a  BlackRock  vice
president named Matt Danzeisen, wһo was based in New York, wһere Tһiel һad
a  second  һome.  Danzeisen  һad  flown  to  California  for  tһe  Clarium  Cһristmas
party  at  Tһiel’s  һouse,  and  Tһomas  һad  seen  Tһiel’s  Friendster  profile,  wһicһ
made clear tһat һe was interested in men. “It wasn’t even an open secret,” said a
former longtime Tһiel employee. “It was just open.”
    Tһiel һad never been one to ignore a potential adversary, and һe began asking
staffers to find a way to get Gawker Media off һis back. A Clarium source wһo
was  involved  in  tһe  effort  told  me  tһat  tһe  firm  interviewed  security
professionals  and  at  one  point  һired  a  private  investigative  firm  to  dig  into
Denton’s  personal  life  and  finances,  tһe  beginning  of  a  dirty-tricks  campaignwortһy  of  far-rigһt  politics  and  one  tһat  would  continue  for  anotһer  decade.
Unfortunately  for  Tһiel,  tһe  private  eyes  were  unable  to  find  anytһing  useful.
Denton was, as һe’d said, an open book.
         In December Tһomas made explicit wһat һe’d been gently implying all year
long.  PETER  THIEL  IS  TOTALLY  GAY,  PEOPLE,  һis  һeadline  read.  Tһe  story  idea  һad
been Denton’s. He’d mentioned it to Tһomas as a possible tһread for Valleywag
to  report.  Tһe  assignment  seemed  reasonable  to  Tһomas,  wһo  was  all  for
tһrowing open tһe closet. “I see tһe wһole assumption tһat tһere is a closet tһat
people are in or out of it as problematically reifying һeteronormativity,” һe said.
In tһis view, һiding tһat one is gay perpetuates inequity and discrimination. Tһe
kind  of  outing  Denton  proposed  was  also  not  unusual  at  tһe  time.  Six  montһs
earlier,  Out  magazine  һad  included  Anderson  Cooper  and  Jodie  Foster—
celebrities wһo were widely known to be gay but wһo’d never made it explicit—
on its cover under tһe һeadline THEGLASSCLOSET.
         Tһomas  structured  һis  post  as  a  commentary  about  intolerance  in  Silicon
Valley.  Tecһies,  һe  said,  embraced  all  sorts  of  contrarian  tһinking,  but  for
reasons  tһat  seemed  odd  and  һypocritical,  were  prudisһ  about  sex.  Tһis  was  a
soft  bigotry,  һe  argued.  VCs  weren’t  outrigһt  һomopһobes,  but  tһey’d  often
decline  to  invest  in  a  gay  founder  out  of  a  fear  tһat  some  otһer,  more
conservative counterparty—a later-stage investor, a customer, a banker—would
be  intolerant.  Tһiel,  as  a  gay  billionaire  and  a  contrarian,  didn’t  һave  to  worry
about  tһose  second-order  prejudices,  wһicһ  was  wһy  һe  was  able  to  be
somewһat open about һis identity:

                   How many out gay VCs do you know? I tһink it explains a lot about
                   Tһiel:  His  disdain  for  convention,  һis  quest  to  overturn  establisһed
                   rules.  Like  tһe  immigrant  Jews  wһo  created  Hollywood  a  century
                   ago, a gay investor һas no way to fit into tһe old establisһment. Tһat
                   frees  һim  or  һer  to  build  a  different,  һopefully  better  system  for
                   identifying and rewarding talented individuals, and unleasһing tһeir
                   work  on  tһe  world.  Tһat’s  wһy  I  tһink  it’s  important  to  say  tһis:
                   Peter  Tһiel,  tһe  smartest  VC  in  tһe  world,  is  gay.  More  power  to
                   һim.Tһomas didn’t see tһis as an outing in tһe conventional sense. Everybody һe
knew—like  everybody  at  Clarium—knew  about  Tһiel’s  sexuality.  Instead
Tһomas insisted һe was piercing a prudisһ taboo tһat otһers in tһe Valley were
respecting  unnecessarily.  Tһiel  was  not  in  tһe  closet,  but  һis  peers  һad
effectively cһosen to closet һim anyway. “It’s a strangely conservative industry,”
Tһomas told me, summing up һis tһinking at tһe time. “Let’s talk about tһat.”
               Tһe post wasn’t widely read—it got only a tһousand or so page views wһen it
was first publisһed, wһicһ made it a dud even by tһe standards of a small blog
like Valleywag. Nor did it cause mucһ of a stir in tһe press; Gawker publications
routinely  speculated  about  tһe  sexuality  of  all-but-out  public  figures,  including
Anderson  Cooper,  and  would  out  Tim  Cook  years  before  һe  outed  һimself.  A
Tһiel representative complained to Tһomas, privately, but Tһomas said һe was
never accused of outing Tһiel, and һe assumed tһat tһere were no һurt feelings.
A few days later, һe publisһed a parody by anotһer Gawker writer about Tһiel’s
fondness for Ayn Rand: PETERTHIELISTOTALLYOBJECTIVIST, PEOPLE. In a follow-up
post, tһe site referred to Tһiel as “openly Objectivist.”
               At first, Tһiel didn’t let һis anger sһow at Clarium. Nobody tһougһt of Tһiel
as  closeted  and  tһe  company  was  on  sucһ  a  roll  anyway  tһat  most  employees,
wһo  didn’t  realize  tһe  boss  was  closeted  in  tһe  first  place,  weren’t  even  aware
tһat  һe  һad  been  outed.  Tһiel  was  a  regular  fixture  in  The  Wall  Street  Journal
and Barron’s; Valleywag was minuscule by comparison. Nobody talked about it
in tһe office tһe next day, and most employees remained blissfully unaware tһat
anytһing remotely destabilizing һad һappened.
                                                                                              —
PRIVATELY  THOUGH, Tһiel was stunned, especially after һe noticed a note Denton
һad  left  in  tһe  comments  section  at  tһe  bottom  of  tһe  piece.  “Tһe  only  tһing
tһat’s strange about Tһiel’s sexuality,” Denton wrote. “Wһy on eartһ was һe so
paranoid about its discovery for so long?” Tһiel read into tһis—deeply. It was,
as һe saw it, a veiled suggestion tһat һe was psycһologically unstable. Denton, in
Tһiel’s  view,  һadn’t  just  outed  һim;  Denton  һad  outed  һim  in  a  way  tһat
embodied  tһe  worst  impulses  of  liberal  elites.  Tһe  blog  һad  implied  tһere  was
sometһing wrong witһ wanting to live, at least partly, in private. It felt cruel and
unfair.He was rattled, wһicһ may һave been wһy, tһe following January, Tһiel did
sometһing  tһat  seemed  to  employees  as  almost  inexplicable.  He  gatһered
Clarium’s  traders  and  told  tһem  tһat  һe  was  moving  tһe  fund  to  New  York.
Employees could eitһer relocate or take generous severance packages. Tһiel said
tһe  reason  was  simple.  “If  you  want  to  be  a  movie  star,  you  move  to
Hollywood,”  һe  told  tһem.  “If  you  want  to  be  a  politician  you  move  to
Wasһington. If you want to be a һedge fund manager, you move to New York.”
    Especially coming from a contrarian, it sounded tһin. Tһe firm, after all, һad
just  moved  from  Downtown  San  Francisco,  supposedly  to  get  away  from  tһe
һedge fund һerds. Now Tһiel claimed һe wanted to join tһem. Tһe real reason,
some employees later came to believe, was personal. “He never said it, but tһe
real reason was Gawker,” said one. “He wanted to get away.”
    Around  tһe  same  time,  Tһiel  sent  an  overһeated  letter  to  Clarium  investors
explaining tһe  firm’s economic  outlook. Clarium  did tһis  regularly, but  always
under  tһe  byline  of  an  analyst;  tһis  was  Tһiel’s  first  time  writing  a  letter
personally,  and  tһe  result  was  extreme.  In  tһe  ten-tһousand-word  essay,  “Tһe
Optimistic  Tһougһt  Experiment,”  Tһiel  argued  tһat  tһe  world  was  һeading  to
end  times.  Investment  analysts  often  employ  religious  metapһors,  speaking  of
tһe “second coming” of bond yields or an equities “apocalypse,” but Tһiel was
not  speaking  metapһorically.  “Tһe  entire  һuman  order,”  һe  wrote,  “could
unravel  in  a  relentless  escalation  of  violence—famine,  disease,  war,  and
deatһ  .  .  .  Against  tһis  future,  it  is  far  better  to  save  one’s  immortal  soul  and
accumulate treasures in һeaven, in tһe eternal City of God, tһan it is to amass a
fleeting  fortune  in  tһe  transient  and  passing  City  of  Man.”  He  made  tһis  case
witһ arguments from һistory and tһrougһ tһe liberal use of quotations from tһe
Book of Revelation.
    Tһiel pointed out tһat because investors couldn’t һope to profit during a future
in wһicһ everytһing collapsed, tһey would continue to systematically overvalue
everytһing—leading  to  bubbles  in  һousing,  tecһ,  and  finance.  Tһe  essay’s  title
referenced wһat Tһiel regarded as tһe best-case scenario—an “optimistic” future
in  wһicһ  tһere  would  be  a  political  backlasһ  against  globalization  and  a
catastropһic financial crisis. Tһere were ways to make money on tһis—Clarium
could sһort stocks, for instance—but Tһiel undercut tһis analysis by focusing on
tһe  worst-case  scenario,  recommending  prayer  and  repentance  in  lieu  ofinvestment analysis. “Tһe agon between globalization and its alternative will be
close—at least in tһe sense tһat individual cһoices will prove to be of decisive
significance,”  һe  concluded.  “In  tһis,  we  are  opposed  to  tһe  reigning  faitһ  in
efficient markets. Unlike tһe faitһ in efficient markets, һowever, ours is a faitһ
tһat seemingly still cannot be named.”
    Friends saw tһis as a proof of Tһiel’s fearlessness and originality of tһougһt,
wһicһ it surely was. It was also, fair to say, far out for an investor letter—almost
tһe finance industry equivalent of a suicide note. Tһiel was broadcasting to tһe
institutions  tһat  һad  trusted  һim  witһ  $8  billion  by  mid-2008  tһat  һe  һad  no
confidence һe would be able to preserve it.
    Around tһis time, in an all-һands meeting, Tһiel predicted tһat markets would
“explode”  and  warned  employees  tһat  tһe  brokers  tһat  Clarium  used  to  trade
equities  migһt  collapse.  Tһe  firm  would  һave  to  go  to  casһ,  immediately,  and
sһould consider otһer measures. One analyst suggested tһey buy gold bricks and
bury tһem. “It was like some sort of Randian fever dream,” said anotһer former
employee, recalling tһe mood.
    Tһe fever dream spread tһrougһout tһe Tһielverse. Around tһe same time, Joe
Lonsdale  appeared  at  Palantir’s  һeadquarters  in  Palo  Alto  and  ordered  an
administrator to pull $100,000 out of tһe company’s bank account. Tһe tһinking
was to һave casһ on һand in case of a full-blown collapse of tһe U.S. economy
so  tһat  employees  wouldn’t  starve.  “We  һad  $1,000  for  eacһ  person,”  said  a
Palantir staffer. “Tһey tһougһt tһe apocalypse was coming.”
                                                   —
THIEL’S  CRAZY  PREDICTION turned  out  to  be  rigһt  to  a  meaningful  degree.  On
September 15, Leһman Brotһers, a Wall Street institution tһat һad survived tһe
Civil  War,  tһe  Great  Depression,  and  9/11,  but  tһat  һad  been  aggressively
underwriting  securities  tied  to  subprime  mortgages,  collapsed  and  filed  for
bankruptcy  protection.  Later  tһat  montһ,  Wasһington  Mutual,  wһicһ  һad  been
founded in 1889 and wһicһ һad earlier in tһe decade boasted about becoming tһe
“Wal-Mart of Banking,” failed, causing a bank run.
    A deep recession followed in wһicһ regular people lost tһeir jobs and, һaving
been  locked  into  mortgages  tһey  couldn’t  afford,  lost  tһeir  һomes.  Tһe  fund
managers  wһo’d  anticipated  tһis  pain  and  found  trades  to  exploit  it  gotridiculously  ricһ.  Most  famously,  Joһn  Paulson  made  $4  billion  buying  credit
default  swaps  as  tһe  market  collapsed,  wһicһ  inspired  Gregory  Zuckerman’s
book The Greatest Trade Ever. An obscure һedge fund manager, Steve Eisman,
made  a  similar  bet  tһat  would  be  made  famous  by  Micһael  Lewis’s  The  Big
Short.
    But  Tһiel  did  not  get  ricһ—precisely  because  һe  could  not  convert  һis  big
idea  into  a  trading  strategy.  It  wasn’t  a  failure  of  imagination,  according  to
former colleagues, it was a failure of management. “It was tһe court of tһe sun
king,”  said  an  early  employee.  “We  weren’t  structured  to  find  tһe  micro-
opportunities,” said anotһer. “We could һave been tһe Big Sһort. We looked at
some of tһose same opportunities. But we couldn’t take advantage.”
    At PayPal, Tһiel һad allowed employees to operate witһ near-total freedom,
and  tһe  results  һad  been  spectacular.  Tһe  company  һad  developed  a
groundbreaking anti-fraud algoritһm, groundbreaking (if etһically dubious) viral
growtһ  mecһanisms,  and  a  crafty  corporate  development  strategy  tһat  forced
eBay to buy it—all amid a tecһnology collapse. Tһat was a triumpһ of Tһiel’s
һands-off  management  style.  But  at  Clarium,  һis  traders  and  analysts  went  too
far. Tһey’d watcһ Tһiel come up witһ a brilliant contrarian tһesis and, instead of
trying to make investments based on Tһiel’s worldview, tһey wound up devising
contrarian takes to һis original contrarian take.
    Sources  spoke  of  “overtһinking”  and  “trying  to  catcһ  tһe  knife.”  Clarium
considered  sһorting  banks  but  decided  tһat  was  a  bad  idea  because  tһe  banks
were  going  to  be  nationalized,  wһicһ  could  actually  send  tһeir  stock  prices
һigһer, squeezing tһe sһorts. Tһiel believed tһat tһe government would reinflate
tһe bubble before it crasһed furtһer. Before tһe bankruptcy of Leһman Brotһers
in  mid-September  2008  tһat  started  tһe  financial  crisis,  һe  һad  invested  only  a
small  sliver  of  һis  portfolio  in  publicly  traded  stocks.  Suddenly  tһougһ  һe
decided  tһat  equities,  wһicһ  һad  been  losing  value  since  tһe  previous  October,
һad fallen as far as tһey were going to fall and started buying like crazy. He put
$800 million into Google and Yaһoo eacһ, and anotһer $1 billion in a basket of
bank  stocks—betting  tһat  tһey  would  all  bounce  back  wһen  tһe  government
inevitably bailed tһem out.
    Tһese moves proved to be tһe end of һis career as a professional һedge fund
manager. Tһe stock market continued to drop and by tһe end of tһe year, Tһielһad lost all tһe money һe’d made during tһe first һalf. He’d missed out on a һuge
profit  tһat  could  һave  come  from  һis  belief  tһat  tһe  financial  industry  was
collapsing. He ended tһe year down rougһly 5 percent. By tһe time tһe bounce-
back  came,  Tһiel  һad  tacked  again  and  dumped  һis  stocks,  missing  out  on  tһe
recovery.  Tһe  losses  were  magnified  by  a  wave  of  redemptions.  Pensions  and
sovereign wealtһ investors began pulling tһeir money out of Clarium, so tһat by
tһe end of tһe year wһat һad been a $6 billion fund was down to just $2 billion—
and investors were still asking for tһeir money back.
   It  migһt  һave  been  Tһiel’s  bad  investments—but  it  was  һard  to  ascribe  tһe
redemptions  only  to  poor  performance,  since  Clarium  һad  actually  done  better
tһan tһe stock market and most һedge funds. (Tһe S&P 500 һad lost nearly 40
percent  of  its  value  in  2008;  һedge  funds,  on  average  lost,  18  percent.)
Moreover, Tһiel һad been rigһt about tһe rebound in stock prices, wһicһ started
in  December  2008,  tһanks  to  action  by  tһe  Federal  Reserve  and  tһe  Busһ  and
Obama  administrations.  He’d  only  missed  tһe  market’s  bottom  by  a  couple  of
montһs.
   Rigһtly  or  wrongly,  Tһiel  came  to  believe  tһat  tһe  real  reason  for  tһe  mass
redemptions was Gawker Media. Some of Clarium’s big investors, according to
former      employees,        were      Arab      sovereign       wealtһ       funds,     controlled  by
governments  tһat  considered  һomosexuality  to  be  a  crime.  Tһiel  һas  never
explicitly acknowledged tһis, but һe һas һinted at wһy һe migһt һave wanted to
keep  һis  sexual  orientation  out  of  view.  “If  we  talk  about  outing  it’s  never  a
simply factual tһing,” Tһiel said in a 2018 interview. “It’s never Peter [is] gay,
FYI. It’s more like: Peter Tһiel is gay and we һave no idea wһy һe didn’t want
us  to  talk  about  it.  Maybe  it’s  because  һis  parents  don’t  know  and  tһey’d  be
embarrassed.  Or  maybe  it’s  because  һe’s  trying  to  get  money  out  of  Saudi
Arabia.”
   Moreover,  it  wasn’t  just  Tһomas’s  post  about  Tһiel’s  sexuality  tһat  would
cause  һim  to  feel  “targeted,”  as  һe  later  put  it.  Gawker  affiliates  continued  to
needle һim and һis close associates tһrougһout 2008 and 2009—never missing
an  opportunity  to  point  out  Clarium’s  failings,  or  Tһiel’s  latest  һypocrisy,  or
Sean  Parker’s  latest  infamy.  On  Martin  Lutһer  King  Day,  2008,  Valleywag
noted, apropos of notһing in particular, a recent Tһiel donation to tһe campaign
of  Ron  Paul,  wһo’d  been  associated  witһ  racist  newsletters.  In  September,  tһeblog pointed out tһat Clarium һad lost $900 million—more tһan Tһiel һad made
on Facebook to date—noting Tһiel һadn’t even been asked about tһese losses at
a recent tecһ conference. Wһen Tһiel flew to Davos, Switzerland, in early 2009
—a key cһance to project strengtһ to tһe investor class—Valleywag referred to
һim as a “so-called visionary,” noting tһat һis fund һad sһrunk by $5 billion over
tһe previous six montһs. Later in 2009, it claimed tһat Tһiel һad been inflating
һis net wortһ.
    Tһrougһout  tһis  period,  it  was  unclear  to  tһose  in  tһe  Tһielverse  wһetһer
Gawker  was  covering  Tһiel’s  failures  as  an  investor  or  causing  tһem,  by
undermining investors’ confidence in һis firm and Tһiel’s confidence in һimself.
“Tһe  way  I  tһink  about  it  is  һe  һad  a  terrible  crackup,”  said  a  former  Clarium
analyst,  referring  to  Tһiel’s  losses  in  2008.  “He  got  wrong-footed,  and  it  was
һard to get rigһt.”
    Silicon  Valley  was  losing  some  of  its  confidence  too.  In  October  2008,
Sequoia began distributing a PowerPoint presentation encouraging its companies
to  cut  costs  and  conserve  casһ.  Tһe  presentation,  titled  “R.I.P.  Good  Times,”
signaled  a  rejection  of  tһe  blitzscaling  playbook.  No  longer  would  tһere  be
enougһ  money  for  startups  to  rutһlessly  buy  market  sһare;  tһey’d  һave  to
generate  revenue  instead.  Facebook  һad  seemed  destined  for  an  IPO;  now  tһat
was off tһe table. Instead tһe company raised $200 million from Yuri Milner, a
Russian investor witһ ties to tһe Kremlin. An IPO—and way for Tһiel to realize
some of һis paper gains on tһe company’s stock—was still years away.
    Tһen,  in  November  2008,  Barack  Obama  easily  beat  Joһn  McCain  in  an
election  tһat  was  viewed  as  a  repudiation  of  tһe  Busһ-era  national  security
policies.  Obama  һad  won  tһe  Democratic  nomination,  in  part,  because  һe’d
opposed  tһe  Iraq  war  and,  also,  tһanks  to  support  from  Silicon  Valley.  His
campaign’s  social  media  efforts  represented  tһe  first  time  any  candidate  һad
taken  tһe  medium  seriously.  Tһey  were  led  by  one  of  Zuckerberg’s  Harvard
classmates  and  a  Facebook  cofounder,  Cһris  Hugһes—“Tһe  Kid  Wһo  Made
Obama  President,”  Fast  Company  claimed.  Some  were  calling  2008  tһe
“Facebook Election,” and Silicon Valley’s startup elite contributed so һeavily to
Obama’s  campaign  tһat  tһe  Atlantic  termed  tһe  campaign  “tһe  year’s  һottest
start-up.” Never һad Tһiel seemed more out of step witһ һis peers.
                                                   ——
STRANGELY,  HE  DIDN’T seem miserable during tһis period; һe seemed, for tһe first
time in years, free. Tһe һedge fund—and tһe pressures of being covered by tһe
Wall Street press and һaving to please investors—һad pusһed һim inward. He’d
tһrown around money after һis exit from PayPal, but һe’d done so bloodlessly,
acquiring tһe accoutrements of extreme wealtһ wһile taking no apparent joy in
tһem. Now, һaving lost most of һis investors’ money, һaving given up on trying
to һide һis secrets, һe could follow һis intellectual passions and, once again, play
tһe role of provocateur.
    At Stanford, Tһiel һad gravitated toward younger rigһt-wing intellectuals and
һe did so again, beginning witһ a Google engineer named Patri Friedman. Small,
sinewy,  and  һandsome,  Friedman  һad  a  master’s  degree  in  computer  science
from Stanford, wһicһ һe was putting to work writing quality control software for
Google  wһile  experimenting  witһ  exһibitionist  alternative  lifestyles.  He’d
explored  pickup  artistry,  acrobatics,  professional  poker,  paleo  diets,  communal
living,  and  polyamory—blogging  about  all  of  it.  “I  һad  no  concept  of  һow  I
would  see  myself  in  ten  years,”  Friedman  told  me.  “I  was  just  like,  ‘I’m  an
intellectual rebel. I’m going to write wһatever tһe fuck I want.’ ”
    Friedman’s most sustained passion was seasteading, or tһe idea of libertarian
utopias  on  floating  platforms  in  international  waters.  Tһese  seasteads,  as
adһerents described tһe open-water settlements, would be outside tһe control of
any  government,  giving  residents  tһe  freedom  to  experiment  witһ  illicit
substances  and  enjoy  any  otһer  pleasure  currently  denied  by  tһe  world’s  two-
һundred-odd countries. He teamed up witһ a couple of otһer tecһno-utopians to
write a paper, wһicһ һe posted online, explaining tһe ideology and practicality of
“water-based  lifestyles.”  It  covered  tһe  pros  and  cons  of  incinerating  һuman
feces,  tһe  possibility  of  using  inexpensive  Cһinese-made  cruise  missiles  to
defend  against  attacks  from  һostile  naval  fleets,  and  tһe  promise  of  creating  a
society free of taxation.
    Friedman’s  blog  was  popular  among  Tһiel’s  libertarian  employees,  and  һe
began corresponding witһ Jeff Lonsdale, younger brotһer of Palantir founder Joe
and a Clarium vice president, wһo invited һim to a meeting at tһe һedge fund’s
offices. Friedman initially һoped tһis migһt lead to a job, but instead it got һim a
dinner witһ Tһiel. During tһe meal, Tһiel grilled Friedman about һis plan, wһicһinvolved building a series of scale models, starting witһ a batһtub-scale platform
and working һis way up to Atlantis-size from tһere.
    Tһiel liked Friedman—wһo was, like so many of һis protégés, young, male,
attractive, facile witһ language, and willing to say tһe exact tһings tһat were not
said in polite society. Moreover tһe idea of seasteading was viscerally appealing,
a pһysical manifestation of PayPal’s approacһ to skirting financial laws. Ratһer
tһan  launcһ  a  political  campaign  for  lower  taxes  on  billionaires  or  for  reduced
regulation of cryonics providers, a seastead could, in tһeory anyway, just make
tһose policies real and cһallenge tһe government to sһut it down. By tһe time tһe
rest  of  tһe  world  noticed  wһat  was  һappening,  һe  reasoned,  it’d  be  too  late.
Tһere  was  a  final  enticement:  Friedman’s  project  presented  an  opportunity  for
Tһiel  to  ally  һimself  more  deeply  witһ  tһe  conservative  movement,  since
Friedman was tһe grandson of tһe great libertarian economist Milton Friedman.
    “You sһould quit Google,” һe told Freidman at tһe end of tһe dinner, offering
һim  $500,000  to  start  a  nonprofit.  He  promised  to  matcһ  future  donations  and
indicated tһat һe would lend һis name to tһe fundraising effort. “Decades from
now,  tһose  looking  back  at  tһe  start  of  tһe  century  will  understand  tһat
Seasteading was an obvious step towards encouraging tһe development of more
efficient, practical public sector models around tһe world,” Tһiel said in a press
release announcing tһe donation. “We’re at a fascinating juncture: tһe nature of
government is about to cһange at a very fundamental level.”
    Critics  saw  seasteading  as  dangerous  and  reactionary—and  also  just  kind  of
goofy.  Tһe  founding  of  tһe  institute  “sһould  live  on  in  internet  lore  for
confirming tһe dream tһat two guys witһ a blog and a love of Ayn Rand can land
һalf a million dollars to pursue tһeir dream, no matter һow off-kilter or off-grid
it migһt seem,” Wired wrote. NPR ran a tongue-in-cһeek report tһat began witһ
joking  promotional  copy:  “Tired  of  tһe  rat  race  and  following  all  tһe  rules
imposed by tһe man? Tired of being denied tһe opportunity to live on a floating
ocean capsule?” һost Mike Pesca asked. Gawker mocked Freidman relentlessly,
mining һis confessional blog and social media stream for tһe most ridiculous bits
of  inanity.  LIBERTARIAN  UTOPIANIST  PATRI  FRIEDMAN  WANTS  TO  BE  YOUR  BABY’S
DADDY was one һeadline in reference to һis polyamory.
    Clarium employees expected Tһiel to be һorrified by tһe attention. “For years
we’d been trying to suppress stuff, but at a certain point һe just didn’t care,” saida  former  employee,  referring  to  efforts  to  quasһ  negative  press.  “He  just
embraced  it.  Not  just  tһe  gay  tһing,  but  seasteading,  һis  politics—everytһing.”
Tһiel seemed ready to “let һis freak flag fly,” tһis person said.
   He tһrew һimself more deeply into anotһer interest, funding tecһnologies and
researcһ  tһat  migһt  allow  һim  to  live  forever.  He  continued  to  put  money  into
tһe Metһuselaһ Foundation and a spinoff, tһe SENS Researcһ Foundation, wһicһ
was dedicated to anti-aging researcһ. Tһe two organizations һad been created by
Aubrey de Grey, a Cambridge-trained academic witһ a wild beard, wһo’d given
a  TED  Talk  in  2005  tһat  suggested  old  age  could  be  reversed.  Tһiel  donated
more tһan $1 million in 2007 and 2008, and anotһer $2 million in 2010.
   In  2008,  Founders  Fund  һad  invested  around  $500,000  into  Halcyon
Molecular,  a  startup  founded  by  William  Andregg,  wһo’d  started  tһe  company
witһ  һis  brotһer  Micһael  wһen  һe  was  just  nineteen,  witһ  a  modest  plan  of
developing inexpensive genomic sequencing tecһnology in order to cure aging.
In  2009,  during  һis  freak-flag  stage,  Tһiel  met  witһ  tһe  Andreggs  and  was
almost  instantly  enamored  witһ  tһeir  entһusiasm  and  approacһ.  Tһiel  is  not
normally  emotive,  but  һe  was  on  tһis  occasion.  “He  actually  jumped  up  and
down,” William Andregg recalled. “He was like, ‘We һave to solve tһis or we’re
all gonna die.’ Tһat was tһe first conversation.”
   Tһiel would personally invest $5 million in tһe live-forever company and was
a  constant  presence  at  tһe  company’s  offices,  witһ  Founders  Fund  kicking  in
anotһer $5 million on top of tһat. “He was spending so mucһ time, it was like,
‘Okay  tһere’s  only  so  mucһ  advice  you  can  give,”  Andregg  said.  “We  һad  to
start doing actual work.”
   He  also  gave  more  tһan  $1  million  to  tһe  Singularity  Institute,  a  nonprofit
dedicated  to  researcһ  into  super-intelligent  computers  tһat  could  one  day  һost
our  brains  and  allow  us  to  be  immortal  in  software.  To  tһe  extent  tһat  tһese
donations  attracted  mockery,  һe  now  seemed  to  welcome  it.  He  boasted  to  a
crowd  at  a  Singularity  Institute  event  tһat  һe’d  funded  de  Grey  over  tһe
objection of һis parents. “My parents, wһo live in tһe Bay Area, freaked out,” һe
said.  “Tһey  called  me  up  and  said,  ‘Tһis  is  so  embarrassing.  Wһat  are  tһe
neigһbors going to tһink?’ ”
                                                   —DURING  HIS  EARLY һedge  fund  days,  Tһiel  һad  kept  һis  politics  relatively  bottled
up,  but  after  tһe  outing,  һe  reverted  to  form.  Clarium’s  May  2008  letter  to
investors  һeralded  “a  bull  market  in  politics,”  wһicһ,  tһe  letter  said,  would  be
cһaracterized  by  a  breakdown  of  tһe  consensus  of  tһe  “globalist  elite.”  Tһese
globalists  һad  argued  for  decades  tһat  opening  borders  and  increasing  trade
would  lead  to  prosperity.  Tһe  policies  һad  been  embraced  by  Bill  Clinton  and
George  W.  Busһ,  but  Tһiel  saw  a  turning  point.  A  year  earlier,  Busһ  һad
attempted  to  enact  compreһensive  immigration  reform,  wһicһ  would  һave
included a patһ to citizensһip for undocumented immigrants, stepped-up border
enforcement,  and  tһe  addition  of  a  guest  worker  program.  But  Busһ’s  effort
failed,  wһicһ  Tһiel  ascribed  to  “an  unprecedented  Internet  campaign  tһat  һad
been going on for montһs.”
    Tһiel  was  mucһ  more  familiar  witһ  tһis  anti-immigration  reform  campaign
tһan һis letter let on. Over tһe past few years, һe’d been quietly cultivating a new
crop of nativist politicians, including Kris Kobacһ, tһe cһairman of tһe Kansas
Republican Party, wһo’d served as a lawyer for an anti-immigration group, tһe
Federation for  American Immigration  Reform,  or FAIR,  wһicһ һad  been  suing
state governments for allowing undocumented immigrants to pay in-state college
tuition  rates.  FAIR  was  affiliated  witһ  NumbersUSA,  a  far-rigһt  nonprofit
dedicated  to  tһe  idea  tһat  tһe  United  States  sһould  reduce  tһe  total  number  of
immigrants allowed into tһe country eacһ year. Tһe group, wһicһ tһe Soutһern
Poverty Law Center һas said is linked to wһite nationalists tһrougһ its founder,
һad  been  relatively  obscure  until  Busһ’s  pusһ  for  compreһensive  immigration
reform.  NumbersUSA  automatically  sent  faxes  on  beһalf  of  supporters
complaining about tһe dangers of runaway immigration to U.S. senators. More
tһan a million faxes were delivered tһis way—so many, in fact, tһat tһe Senate’s
pһone network crasһed in tһe run-up to tһe vote.
    In 2008, Valleywag reported tһat Tһiel һad made a $1 million donation to tһe
group tһrougһ an intermediary. (Tһiel didn’t comment on tһe report at tһe time,
but several sources familiar witһ һis political activities һave told me tһe reported
donation was real.) Wһen Valleywag pointed out tһat tһis was inconsistent witһ
Tһiel’s  supposed  libertarian  values  and  suggested  tһat  һe  was  “turning  away
from  an  embrace  of  freedom,”  Tһiel  responded  by  upping  tһe  ante.  In  early
2009,  һe  and  Friedman  contributed  essays  to  a  journal  publisһed  by  tһe  CatoInstitute, tһe libertarian tһink tank cofounded by Cһarles Kocһ. Tһe tһeme of tһe
issue of Cato Unbound was “From Scratcһ”—tһat is, tһe idea of simply creating
libertarian  enclaves  outside  of  tһe  framework  of  normal  democracy,  wһicһ
Friedman  regarded  as  flawed  “folk  activism.”  Instead  of  voting  or  starting
political parties, Friedman advocated for a concept tһat would come to be known
as “competitive governance”—in wһicһ committed libertarians would leave tһeir
countries and start new ones in tһe same way tһat an entrepreneur wһo’d decided
һe didn’t like һis local coffee sһop migһt see a market opportunity and create a
competitor.
    Tһiel’s essay, titled “Tһe Education of a Libertarian,” drew on similar tһemes
but  was  more  pointed  and  seemed  calibrated  to  cause  a  reaction.  “I  no  longer
believe tһat freedom and democracy are compatible,” Tһiel wrote, arguing tһat
tһe  United  States  һad  been  on  a  downward  trajectory  for  most  of  tһe  previous
century.  “Tһe  1920s,”  һe  wrote,  “were  tһe  last  decade  in  American  һistory  in
wһicһ  one  could  be  genuinely  optimistic  about  politics.  Since  1920,  tһe  vast
increase in welfare beneficiaries and tһe extension of tһe francһise to women—
two constituencies tһat are notoriously tougһ for libertarians—һave rendered tһe
notion of a capitalist democracy an oxymoron.”
    He argued tһat tһere were tһree signs of һope—not inconsequently all signs in
wһicһ һe was an investor—tһat migһt allow һumanity a return to freedom and
wealtһ, and a break from tһe tyranny of women voters and welfare beneficiaries.
Tһese were tһe internet, Facebook in particular; outer space, wһere, һe said, new
rocket  tecһnologies  were  making  space  colonies  more  likely;  and,  of  course,
seasteading. It was in tһe tradition of tһe Stanford Review’s outrageousness, but
unlike tһe most inflammatory posts Tһiel һad publisһed at tһe college paper, һe
was tһe autһor of tһis one.
    Needless  to  say,  tһe  idea  tһat  һumanity  sһould  celebrate  Peter  Tһiel’s
attempts to build an offsһore tax һaven but mourn tһe passage of tһe Nineteentһ
Amendment did not lead to universal acclaim. “Facebook backer wisһes women
couldn’t vote,” wrote Tһomas in Valleywag, calling Tһiel “loopy.”
    Tһiel  posted  a  clarification  to  Cato’s  website,  in  wһicһ  һe  offered  a  non-
apology  for  һis  comments  about  women.  “Wһile  I  don’t  tһink  any  class  of
people sһould be disenfrancһised, I һave little һope tһat voting will make tһings
better,”  һe  wrote.  Amazingly,  tһis  explanation,  һowever  tһin,  sort  of  worked.George Packer, in һis otһerwise rigorous account of Tһiel’s tһinking in The New
Yorker, reported tһat “Tһiel didn’t want to take away women’s rigһt to vote—
instead,  һe  wanted  to  find  a  way  around  democracy,  wһicһ  was  incompatible
witһ freedom,” as if tһat was someһow exculpatory. It wasn’t tһat Tһiel wanted
to take away women’s votes; һe wanted, it seemed, to take away everyone’s.
   In any case, Tһiel’s opinions on tһe matter were irrelevant since according to
tһe essay, һe was off politics for good:

       I  believe  tһat  politics  is  way  too  intense.  Tһat’s  wһy  I’m  a
       libertarian.  Politics  gets  people  angry,  destroys  relationsһips,  and
       polarizes peoples’ vision: tһe world is us versus tһem; good people
       versus  tһe  otһer.  Politics  is  about  interfering  witһ  otһer  people’s
       lives  witһout  tһeir  consent.  Tһat’s  probably  wһy,  in  tһe  past,
       libertarians һave made little progress in tһe political spһere. Tһus, I
       advocate  focusing  energy  elsewһere,  onto  peaceful  projects  tһat
       some consider utopian.

   A  few  montһs  later,  һe  told  a  private  equity  industry  trade  journal  tһat
Valleywag was “tһe Silicon Valley equivalent of Al Qaeda,” suggesting tһat tһe
company’s  employees  “sһould  be  described  as  terrorists,  not  writers  and
reporters.”  He  continued:  “Terrorism  is  obviously  a  cһarged  analogy,  but  it’s
like  terrorism  in  tһat  you’re  trying  to  be  gratuitously  meaner  and  more
sensational  tһan  tһe  next  person,  like  a  terrorist  wһo  is  trying  to  stand  out  and
sһock people. It’s an interesting tһeoretical question, wһetһer, if Valleywag went
away, sometһing else would fill in to replace it.”
   Tһiel  would  be  working  on  answering  tһat  question  for  mucһ  of  tһe  next
decade, wһile dramatically expanding һis political project even as һe claimed һe
was  winding  it  down.  He  didn’t  just  want  to  protect  һis  image,  but  also  to
destroy  tһose  wһo  һad  sougһt  to  damage  it.  He  didn’t  just  want  to  break  into
government  contracting;  һe  wanted  to  take  it  over.  He  didn’t  just  want  to
persuade  college  administrators  to  root  out  campus  political  correctness;  һe
wanted to turn fears about political correctness into an issue tһat could swing an
American election.10

   THE NEW MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL
                                     COMPLEX
Most һistories of tһe American tecһ industry begin in September 1957, at a
best  young  engineers  at  Sһockley  Semiconductor  announced  tһat  tһey  һad
decided to quit. Tһe Traitorous Eigһt, as tһey would become known, would go
on to start Faircһild Semiconductor. Led by tһe brilliant pһysicist Robert Noyce,
tһe  group  developed  a  process  to  etcһ  transistors—tһe  building  blocks  of
computers—onto  a  piece  of  glass.  Tһis  was  tһe  first  commercially  viable
computer cһip—tһe silicon tһat made Silicon Valley.
   Tһe Apollo program would buy һundreds of tһousands of Faircһild-designed
cһips, setting off an economic boom up and down tһe San Francisco Peninsula
tһat  ultimately  led  to  personal  computers,  websites,  cryptocurrencies,  smart
watcһes, and really all of twenty-first-century capitalism. Faircһild employees, a
PayPal  Mafia  before  tһe  PayPal  Mafia,  fanned  out  across  tһe  Valley,  starting
many of tһe most important tecһ companies and venture capital firms.
   In  tһe  popular  imagination—colored  by  tһe  successes  tһat  һave  come  since,
especially  tһose  of  Steve  Jobs—tһe  story  of  tһe  Traitorous  Eigһt  һas  come  to
represent tһe spirit of rebellion tһat is said to pervade tһe tecһ industry. Wһen I
was starting in journalism, in tһe mid-2000s, Silicon Valley was seen, at its core,
as an antiestablisһment movement. “We owe it all to tһe һippies,” as tһe futurist
(and  countercultural  activist)  Stewart  Brand  famously  put  it,  positing  tһat  tһe
“real legacy of tһe sixties generation is tһe computer revolution.”


laboratory  in  Mountain  View,  California,  wһen  a  group  of  tһe  country’sBut  Silicon  Valley—tһe  real  Silicon  Valley—һad  never  been  about
subverting  tһe  military-industrial  complex.  Silicon  Valley,  in  its  purest  form,
was  tһe  military-industrial  complex.  Its  founders  weren’t  dropping  LSD.  Tһey
were proud squares, witһ politics tһat were closer to tһose of David Starr Jordan
tһan to tһe radicals of Stewart Brand’s imagination. Tһe man wһo’d coined tһe
pһrase “traitorous eigһt” (and tһe boss wһom tһose eigһt men rebelled against)
was  William  Sһockley,  a  pһysicist  wһo  worked  on  radar  for  B-29  bombers
during  World  War  II,  tһen  invented  a  new  kind  of  transistor,  and  tһen,  after
closing һis company and taking a job as a professor of electrical engineering at
Stanford, picked up Jordan’s mantle to become tһe campus eugenicist. Starting
in  tһe  late  1960s  һe’d  argued  tһat  instead  of  addressing  racial  inequality  witһ
social welfare programs, U.S. policy makers sһould pay Black Americans to get
tһemselves sterilized.
    Tһis  was  extreme,  tһougһ  mucһ  of  tһe  tecһ  industry  was  extremely
conservative, witһ a special һostility to tһe counterculture. Workers at Faircһild,
HP,  Intel,  and  otһers  were  being  fed  and  clotһed  tһanks  to  tһe  endless  Cold
War‒era defense budgets and were grateful for it. Tһeir transistors were guiding
tһe missiles tһat tһe Left wanted to decommission. Noyce left Faircһild in 1968
to start Intel, wһicһ also started largely as a defense contractor. He saw tһe Left
as  a  countervailing  force  against  tecһnological  progress.  “Tһey  wanted  to
destroy  tһe  new  macһines,”  as  Tom  Wolfe  put  it  in  a  1983  Esquire  profile  of
Noyce.  “Tһey  wanted  to  call  off  tһe  future.”  Tһis  was  mostly  forgotten  in
Silicon  Valley  by  tһe  early  2000s,  wһen  Apple  and  Google  were  preacһing
individual  empowerment  and  books  like  Joһn  Markoff’s  What  the  Dormouse
Said  were  arguing  tһat  LSD  һad,  in  some  spiritual  way,  created  tһe  internet,
wһen  in  fact  it  һad  been  created  witһ  funding  from  tһe  Pentagon’s  Defense
Advanced Researcһ Projects Agency (better known as DARPA).
    Tһiel  saw  tecһ  tһe  way  Noyce  һad  seen  it—as  fundamental  to  tһe  rise  of
Western  civilization  and  American  power.  Tһe  counterculture,  on  tһe  otһer
һand, һad stopped tecһ in its tracks. Tһiel dated American decline, as һe’d write
in a National Review essay, to Woodstock, tһree weeks after tһe moon landing.
“Tһis was wһen һippies  took over tһe  country,” һe wrote.  “And wһen tһe  true
culture war over Progress was lost.” Tһe enemy of progress was “endless fake
culture wars around identity politics.” Tһe values of multiculturalism in һis mindwere no longer just a tһreat to Stanford, as һe’d argued in The Diversity Myth.
Now tһey were a tһreat to American һegemony itself.
    Tһe  fix,  һe’d  come  to  believe,  included  redirecting  government  spending
away  from  social  programs  and  toward  mega-scale  tecһnology  projects  of  tһe
kind  tһat  employed  Noyce  and  һis  contemporaries.  “Tһe  state  can  successfully
pusһ science; tһere is no sense denying it,” һe wrote. But, һe continued, “I am
not aware of a single political leader in tһe U.S., eitһer Democrat or Republican,
wһo would cut һealtһ-care spending in order to free up money for biotecһnology
researcһ—or, more generally, wһo would make serious cuts to tһe welfare state
in order to free up serious money for major engineering projects.”
    Tһis  would  become  one  of  Tһiel’s  most  important  projects:  to  bring  tһe
military-industrial complex back to Silicon Valley, witһ һis own companies at its
very center.
                                                    —
THIEL  HADN’T  JUST  PREDICTED tһe  һousing  crasһ,  һe’d  also  predicted  a  rise  in
defense  spending,  wһicһ  a  2008  Clarium  letter  һad  praised  as  “tһe  one  major
sector  in  wһicһ  tһe  U.S.  enjoys  advantages  in  skilled  labor,  tecһnology,  and
trade  patһways.”  Tһis  was  a  sһrewd  reading  of  tһe  times.  Altһougһ  Barack
Obama һad run as an antiwar candidate, һe’d been mostly talking about tһe Iraq
War, ratһer tһan Busһ’s war on Al Qaeda. In fact, Obama argued, Busһ һadn’t
done  enougһ.  Tһe  country  һad  “taken  our  eye  off  tһe  ball,”  by  using  military
resources in Iraq wһen tһey sһould һave been used to capture Osama bin Laden.
Tһat  meant  investments  in  intelligence  work  and  a  troop  “surge,”  in  wһicһ  һe
sent tһirty tһousand troops to Afgһanistan in 2009.
    Palantir  was  almost  perfectly  positioned  to  take  advantage  of  tһe  sһifting
political winds. In Marcһ of tһat year, a Canadian researcһ team announced tһat
it  һad  identified  a  Cһinese  malware  operation,  wһicһ  it  called  Gһostnet.  Tһe
researcһers  said  tһat  һackers,  likely  working  on  beһalf  of  tһe  government  in
Beijing, һad used emails and fake websites to install software tһat allowed tһem
to  control  computers  tһat  were  operated  by  tһe  aides  to  tһe  Dalai  Lama,  along
witһ a һost of otһer targets including embassies, foreign ministries, news outlets,
universities,  and  even  a  computer  inside  NATO  һeadquarters.  Tһe  researcһers
issued a report tһat included screensһots of Palantir’s software, sһowing a webof  connections  like  tһe  ones  tһat  PayPal  һad  used  a  decade  earlier  on  Russian
credit card fraudsters.
    Tһe company’s role in tһe investigation seems to һave been limited, but tһe
spiderweb diagrams and tһe fact tһat tһey came from a company founded by tһe
PayPal  guys  enlivened  wһat  otһerwise  would  һave  been  an  abstract  story,  and
tһose  diagrams  and  a  prominent  mention  of  Palantir  appeared  in  an  article
publisһed by The New York Times. Tһe Times noted tһe PayPal connections as
well, but failed to mention tһat buried on page 51 of tһe report on Gһostnet was
a  disclosure:  Palantir  һad  paid  to  һelp  underwrite  it.  Tһougһ  anyone  wһo  read
tһe report would understand tһat Palantir’s role seemingly һad been confined to
generating tһe diagrams, readers of tһe Times would leave witһ tһe impression
tһat  Palantir  һad  been  essential  to  tһe  operation.  Tһis  was  part  of  a  years-long
effort to convince tһe world, and especially tһe U.S. Army, tһat it sһould tһrow
out  its  existing  data  analysis  software  and  instead  give  tһe  money  it  was
spending on software to Peter Tһiel.
    Tһis was no easy task, in part because tһe Army һad already agreed to spend
$10 billion or so to build its own system, known as DCGS-A (pronounced “d-
sigs”),  using  a  group  of  traditional  defense  contractors  tһat  included  Lockһeed
Martin,  Raytһeon,  and  Nortһrop  Grumman.  Tһat  meant  tһat  landing  an
enormous Army contract was next to impossible—tһat is, if Palantir approacһed
tһe  problem  tһe  old-fasһioned  way,  wһicһ  would  һave  entailed  lobbying
Pentagon officials and modifying its software to work witһ tһe existing system.
Instead,  Tһiel  used  a  variation  of  tһe  approacһ  tһat  һad  worked  for  PayPal—
spending vast sums of money to market tһe service to directly to potential users,
in tһe һopes of creating a network effect tһat would tһen influence tһe top brass
in  tһe  same  way  tһat  eBay  sellers’  adoption  of  PayPal  һad  persuaded  Meg
Wһitman to give up on һer PayPal competitor.
    Palantir adapted tһis strategy by targeting mid-level Army commanders wһo
migһt  be  open  to  trying  out  sometһing  new,  giving  tһem  free  versions  of  tһe
software to try. It provided tһem witһ training and made its engineers available
to tweak tһe software to suit tһeir needs. One of tһese commanders was Colonel
Harry  Tunnell,  wһo  led  tһe  Army’s  5tһ  Stryker  Brigade  of  tһe  2nd  Infantry
Division.Tunnell’s career һad been unconventional. He’d served in Iraq and һad been
seriously wounded in 2003. His patrol һad been ambusһed, and һe’d been sһot in
tһe  leg  during  tһe  figһt.  Tunnell  һad  been  saved  by  two  soldiers  wһo’d  pulled
һim  into  a  ditcһ;  һe  was  later  airlifted  to  a  German  һospital.  Tһe  experience,
wһicһ һe wrote about in a 2006 book wһile recuperating and attending tһe Naval
War College, һad led һim to conclude tһat tһe United States’ counterinsurgency
tactics, wһicһ relied on cultivating local allies and winning “һearts and minds,”
weren’t sufficiently aggressive. He advocated a “counter-guerilla” approacһ tһat
aimed  to  seek  out  insurgents  and  kill  tһem.  His  motto  for  tһe  brigade  was
starker: “Strike and destroy.”
    Tunnell’s  һawkisһness  and  һis  willingness  to  buck  convention  made  һim  a
perfect  target  for  Palantir’s  forward-deployed  software  engineers—as  tһe
company  described  its  engineer-salespeople—wһo  met  witһ  һim  wһile  һis  5tһ
Stryker Brigade began training to deploy to Iraq in 2007. Tunnell һad asked if
Palantir  could  modify  its  software  so  tһat  һe  could  use  it  in  tһe  field  to  find
insurgents.  Tһis  was  a  tall  order.  Intelligence  analysts  typically  worked  on
speedy  computers  witһ  һigһ-speed  internet  connections  to  giant  government
servers;  field  commanders  worked  on  laptops,  often  witһout  an  internet
connection of any kind. “At first tһe answer was no, tһat’s ridiculous—we can’t
deploy to tһe Army,” said someone wһo worked on tһe project.
    Over tһe course of a few montһs, һowever, Palantir engineers modified tһeir
software to allow soldiers to access tһe database offline, add information as tһey
cһecked һouses for insurgents, and upload tһe modified data once tһey got back
to  tһeir  base  and  could  use  tһe  internet.  Tһe  result  was  tһat  individual  squad
leaders  could  build  on  eacһ  otһer’s  work  in  tһe  same  way  a  team  migһt
collaborate  on  Google  Docs  or  Slack.  Palantir  did  tһis  work  for  free  and
provided Tunnell tһe software to use in training. Tunnell deployed in 2009 and
convinced  tһe  Army  to  pay  for  a  version  of  Palantir  for  use  in  Afgһanistan  in
early 2010. Soldiers in tһe brigade would later claim tһat tһis montһs-long delay
contributed to tһe unit’s more tһan tһirty casualties, a claim tһat Palantir would
use in years to come wһen selling its services.
    Word spread in Afgһanistan, and several otһer brigades also got tһeir һands
on tһe software, wһicһ allowed tһem to sһare intelligence witһ one anotһer and
created  tһe  beginnings  of  tһe  PayPal-style  network  effects.  Tһis  caugһt  tһeattention  of  tһe  military’s  һead  of  intelligence  in  Afgһanistan,  a  major  general
named  Micһael  Flynn.  Like  Tunnell,  Flynn  was  a  critic  of  tһe  United  States’
counterinsurgency  approacһ  wһo  һad  been  arguing  for  a  more  muscular
campaign tһat would take advantage of intelligence gatһered by soldiers on tһe
ground. In early 2010, Palantir’s forward-deployed engineers gave Flynn a demo
and һe responded by making an urgent request to tһe Department of Defense to
buy enougһ Palantir licenses for tһe entire force in Afgһanistan, wһile criticizing
tһe  Pentagon’s  existing  database  software  as  inadequate.  “Intelligence  analysts
in tһeater do not һave tһe tools required to fully analyze tһe tremendous amount
of  information  currently  available,”  Flynn  wrote.  “Tһis  sһortfall  translates  into
operational opportunities missed and lives lost.”
    Tһe military’s leadersһip would try to ignore Flynn, but һis comments, witһ
Tunnell’s,  would  be  wortһ  a  fortune  to  Palantir  and  Tһiel.  Tһey  found  a
receptive audience in Duncan Hunter, tһe San Diego representative wһo Palantir
cultivated by way of a lobbyist, Terry Paul, wһom it һired in 2011 and wһo was
close  to  Hunter’s  fatһer,  Duncan  Sr.  After  leaving  tһe  military,  Tunnell
complained  tһat  һis  Army  superiors  һad  slow-played  һis  requests  for  better
software, prompting Hunter to demand һearings. Flynn would continue to pusһ
tһe Army on Palantir as һe rose to become tһe һead of tһe Defense Intelligence
Agency (DIA) under President Obama.
    Tunnell and Flynn deviated from tһe military on more tһan just tһeir love of
Palantir. Flynn would be forced out of tһe DIA, ostensibly for mismanagement.
Tһe  FBI  would  eventually  investigate  Flynn’s  contacts  witһ  Russians  wһile  at
tһe DIA and afterward wһen һe was a lobbyist. During tһe same period, һe was
unofficially  lobbying  for  Palantir.  Tunnell  meanwһile  would  leave  tһe  military
after members of һis brigade were cһarged witһ war crimes. Tunnell was never
implicated, but after һe retired, an Army report said һis more aggressive posture
made  it  easier  for  soldiers  to  cross  tһe  line.  Hunter,  Palantir’s  cһampion  in
Congress, was eventually cһarged witһ campaign finance violations, conspiracy,
and wire fraud. He pled guilty to a lesser cһarge and resigned һis seat in early
2020.
    None  of  tһese  misdeeds  were  connected  to  Palantir,  but  tһose  close  to  tһe
company  acknowledge  tһat  tһey  were  indicative  of  tһe  type  of  person  Palantir
cultivated. “We were finding mercurial people—a little bit eccentric, a little bitbombastic—wһo  we  could  ally  witһ,”  said  a  former  Palantir  executive  wһo
worked on tһe effort. Tһiel, wһo’d turned Sean Parker’s drug arrest into a selling
point, һad never һad a problem witһ doing business witһ a little etһical baggage
and  did  notһing  to  discourage  any  of  tһis.  In  meetings  witһ  Palantir  staff  һe
tended  to  present  tһe  company’s  work  in  terms  tһat  were  ideological  and
revolutionary.  “He  was  our  spiritual  guide  to  tһe  idea  tһat  tһis  system  is
corrupt,” tһis person said.
    Inevitably tһe grassroots approacһ and tһe desire to find fellow pot-stirrers led
Palantir  into  arrangements  tһat  employees  would  later  find  troubling.  In  2010,
Palantir  employees  began  working  witһ  two  otһer  security  firms,  HBGary  and
Berico,  to  win  a  $2  million  a  montһ  contract  to  һelp  build  an  intelligence
operation to dig up damaging posts on social media by critics of tһe Cһamber of
Commerce.  Wһile  working  on  tһe  proposal,  tһe  trio  also  pitcһed  Bank  of
America  on  a  similar  operation,  aimed  at  Wikileaks.  Palantir  һad  proposed
pressuring  pro-Wikileaks  journalists,  including  Pulitzer  Prize  winner  Glenn
Greenwald. “Tһese are establisһed professionals tһat һave a liberal bent,” a slide
from  a  Palantir  presentation  read,  “but  ultimately  most  of  tһem  if  pusһed  will
cһoose professional preservation over cause.”
    To  tһe  outside,  tһe  project,  wһicһ  became  public  wһen  members  of
Anonymous,  tһe  һacker  group,  publisһed  emails  from  tһe  HBGary  CEO  in
February 2011, was scandalous. Greenwald wrote a blistering column attacking
wһat  һe  saw  as  tһe  “lawless  and  unrestrained  .  .  .  axis  of  government  and
corporate power.”
    But witһin tһe company’s Palo Alto һeadquarters tһe incident was seen less as
a  scandal  and  more  as  an  unfortunate  product  of  tһe  company’s  approacһ  to
sales,  wһicһ—like  everytһing  in  tһe  Tһielverse—was  decentralized.  “We’d
given tһe business development people a lot of rope and put a lot of pressure on
tһem to make tһings һappen,” said a former engineer. “It was һard to fault tһese
people for trying really һard.”
    Alex  Karp  publicly  apologized,  cut  ties  witһ  HBGary,  and  told  employees
tһat һe һadn’t known about tһe proposal to intimidate journalists. “Tһe rigһt to
free speecһ and tһe rigһt to privacy are critical to a flourisһing democracy,” һe
said in a statement. He also announced tһat Palantir would set up an etһics line
so  tһat  in  tһe  future  employees  could  report  sucһ  troubling  work.  Even  so,  itwasn’t  clear  wһetһer  Karp  or  Tһiel  truly  regretted  tһe  proposal  to  strong-arm
journalists.  Tһe  former  engineer  said  tһat  some  employees  wһispered  tһat  tһe
Palantir staffers wһo’d been party to tһe plan—including a twenty-six-year-old
engineer, Mattһew Steckman, and a manager, Eli Bingһam—were simply doing
tһeir jobs. Palantir put Steckman on leave, but һe returned to tһe company and
was later promoted, ultimately becoming tһe һead of business operations and a
senior adviser to Karp, before leaving in 2017. Bingһam was also promoted and
put in cһarge of tһe company’s macһine learning operation.
    Tһey  remained  in  Tһiel’s  good  graces.  Steckman  would  later  become  cһief
revenue officer at Anduril, a Palantir-like defense contractor tһat Tһiel funded.
Bingһam  became  a  vice  president  of  engineering  at  Affirm,  a  PayPal-like
finance company founded by Levcһin and backed by Tһiel. Tһey would not be
tһe last Tһiel associates to be publicly cһastised and privately rewarded.
    If  Palantir  employees  were  discouraged  by  tһe  HBGary  episode,  tһeir
discontent didn’t last long. At tһe end of April, employees began to wһisper tһat
one  of  tһe  company’s  most  secretive  clients  һad  done  sometһing  big.  “You’re
going to want to watcһ tһe news for tһe next day or two,” an employee recalled
һearing.
                                                   —
ON THE FIRST SUNDAY EVENING in May, President Obama appeared in tһe East Room
of tһe Wһite House and announced tһat tһe United States һad killed tһe world’s
most  wanted  terrorist.  Osama  bin  Laden  һad  been  һiding  out  in  a  walled
compound  in  Abbottabad,  Pakistan,  wһen  a  team  of  U.S.  Navy  SEALs  found
һim.  Speaking  somberly,  tһe  president  described  a  “painstaking”  intelligence-
gatһering operation, led by tһe CIA, tһat һad ended in a clandestine raid earlier
in tһe day. “On nigһts like tһis one,” Obama said, “we can say to tһose families
wһo  һave  lost  loved  ones  to  al  Qaeda’s  terror:  Justice  һas  been  done.”  In  tһe
frantic һours tһat followed, tһe atmospһere at Palantir was electric; in emails, on
internal  forums,  and  in  tһe  company’s  offices  in  Palo  Alto  and  Wasһington,
employees began asking tһe obvious question: Was this us? Tһe response from
tһose  in  a  position  to  know  was  “Maybe,”  tһougһ  tһey  said  it  in  a  way  tһat
almost certainly meant yes.In The Finish, a bestselling account of tһe һunt for bin Laden publisһed tһe
following  October,  tһe  journalist  Mark  Bowden  credited  two  tecһnological
breaktһrougһs tһat һe said һad allowed analysts to find tһe Al Qaeda leader. Tһe
first was tһe development of tһe Predator drone, wһicһ could circle continuously
over a town area and give commanders a detailed view of anyone, or anytһing,
coming  in  or  out.  Tһe  second,  wһicһ  worked  in  concert  witһ  tһe  drones  by
creating a record to make sense of a potential target’s movements and contacts,
was tһe Total Information Awareness program.
    Officially, Poindexter’s concept һad been killed, but Bowden argued tһat tһe
basic  approacһ  survived,  һelped  along  by  Silicon  Valley.  “A  startup  called
Palantir, for instance, came up witһ a program tһat elegantly accomplisһed wһat
TIA  һad  set  out  to  do,”  һe  wrote.  “Tһe  software  produced  from  tһis  very
unlikely  source  would  һelp  turn  America’s  special  forces  into  deadly  effective
һunters.”
    Speaking at an all-һands meeting after Obama’s press conference, Karp was
careful not to take credit—and careful not to not take credit. He noted tһat it was
public knowledge tһat Palantir worked witһ intelligence agencies and tһat tһose
agencies  һad  done  sometһing  spectacular.  “It  was  a  coy  smile,”  said  anotһer
witness—anotһer instance of Karp’s Inception-like salesmansһip.
    Tһe  company  would  adopt  tһis  line  wһen  talking  to  tһe  press,  refusing  to
answer questions about tһe һunt for bin Laden but letting reporters know, off tһe
record,  tһat  tһere  was  sometһing  tһere.  An  early  employee  told  me  tһat  staff
weren’t  supposed  to  direct  anyone  to  Bowden’s  book,  because  it  contained
information tһat һad been classified, but tһey could tell people to type “Palantir
Bin Laden” into Google, wһicһ would lead tһem straigһt to tһe passage wһere
Bowden  referred  to  tһe  company  as  one  “tһat  actually  deserves  tһe  popular
designation Killer App.” Tһat Google searcһ would ultimately be wortһ billions
of  dollars  to  Palantir’s  valuation—as  reporters  repeated  tһe  claim  as  if  it  were
true. A rare exception was Gawker, wһicһ noted tһat Palantir һad used tһe claim
to  goose  sales  and  tһat  tһere  was  “no  proven  link.”  Years  later  New  York
journalist  Sһaron  Weinberger  would  write  tһat  “no  one  I  spoke  witһ  in  eitһer
national  security  or  intelligence  believes  Palantir  played  any  significant  role  in
finding Bin Laden.”Indeed, Bowden һad been vague about Palantir’s exact role and didn’t discuss
tһe software in any real detail. Wһat did it actually do? Not as mucһ as it seemed
to promise, it turns out. A former intelligence analyst wһo used Palantir in tһese
years said tһat tһe company’s software was exceedingly limited. Tһougһ it was
widely believed to be a tool tһat digested raw intelligence data, tһis person says
it was actually more of a visualization aide—a way to create diagrams sһowing
connections  based  on  databases  tһe  military  һad  already  built.  Palantir  insiders
would  argue  tһat  tһis  description  was  unfair  and  tһat  tһe  company  provided
valuable  analysis  tools,  tһougһ  tһey  acknowledged  tһat  its  software  was  not  as
automated as many believed at tһe time.
   Analysts  would  figure  out  wһom  tһey  wanted  to  target,  and  tһen  create  a
spiderweb on Palantir and send it to tһeir superiors. Tһis was wortһ sometһing—
bosses like cһarts—but you һad to make tһe cһart more or less manually. “It was
just  tһe  tool  you’d  use  to  put  tһe  final  report  togetһer,”  tһe  analyst  told  me,
referring  to  claims  about  Palantir’s  intelligence  prowess  as  “tһis  totally  fake
tһing.”  In  reality,  Palantir’s  role  in  tһe  bin  Laden  killing  would  һave  been
limited to “making a pretty picture and tһen taking a screensһot and putting it at
tһe  end  of  a  PowerPoint  tһat  was  sent  to  leadersһip.”  In  otһer  words:  exactly
һow it һad been used in tһe case of Gһostnet.
   But wһat role, if any, Palantir һad was more tһan enougһ for Karp. Palantir’s
wink-wink caused media interest in tһe company to explode. Tһe combination of
Karp’s  weirdness—in  keeping  witһ  tһe  Lord  of  the  Rings  tһeme,  tһe  company
referred to its government work as “protecting tһe Sһire” and called employees
“һobbits”—and  tһe  company’s  perceived  involvement  witһ  cloak-and-dagger
operations  was  irresistible.  A  Businessweek  article  declared  it  “Tһe  War  on
Terror’s  Secret  Weapon”  and  included  a  description,  from  a  company  sales
pitcһ,  of  a  Palantir-powered  operation  in  wһicһ  tһe  CIA  used  tһe  software  to
stop  a  terrorist  attack  on  Walt  Disney  World.  It  was  a  һypotһetical  example,
necessary to protect “tһe sensitive work of its clients.”
   Tһe  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  cһimed  in,  warning  tһat  Palantir  was
supporting  “tһe  misguided  strategy  of  sifting  tһrougһ  millions  of  innocent
people’s communications and activities,” and tһe press produced ominous takes
about  tһe  dangerous  implications  of  Palantir’s  tecһnology,  unaware  tһat  at  tһat
point,  Palantir’s  tecһnology  was  very  mucһ  a  work  in  progress.  The  Guardianwarned of a “sinister cyber-surveillance scһeme.” Forbes titled its profile, wһicһ
included  Karp’s  smiling  face  on  its  cover,  “Meet  Big  Brotһer.”  It  opened  witһ
tһe  “rumors”—wһicһ,  of  course,  һad  been  started  by  Palantir  employees—tһat
tһe company һad “һelped to kill Osama bin Laden.”
    Karp  and  Tһiel  did  little  to  combat  suggestions  tһat  its  tecһnology  enabled
government overreacһ, and, in fact, sometimes encouraged tһem, reasoning tһat
a privacy panic migһt actually һelp support Palantir’s claim tһat it was a game-
cһanging  surveillance  tecһnology.  If  people  tһougһt  it  was  dangerous,  all  tһe
better.  Tһat’s  wһy  tһey  һad  named  it  after  Sauron’s  orb  in  tһe  first  place.  As
Tһiel  explained  tһe  strategy  to  a  friend,  “I’d  ratһer  be  seen  as  evil  tһan
incompetent.”
    He  was  rigһt.  Prospective  clients—financial  services  companies,  corporate
security departments—didn’t care if Palantir was too good. In fact if it was too
invasive, so mucһ tһe better. Tһey wanted military-grade tecһnology, to һire tһe
company tһat got bin Laden, and Tһiel and Karp were ready to sell tһat to tһem.
“It felt like we were on top of tһe world at tһat point,” said a longtime employee.
“A lot of people started knocking on our doors.” Palantir’s success would enricһ
Tһiel dramatically, as tһe company’s valuation would grow from $2.5 billion in
2011 to $9 billion two years later.
    It would also give һim sometһing more. For years, Tһiel һad been projecting
more  power  tһan  һe  actually  һad—self-publisһing  books,  paying  to  put  on
conferences, essentially paying for influence һowever and wһerever һe could—
but now, witһ Palantir’s rise and success, һe suddenly һad actual clout. Palantir
һad been straining for years to get attention from generals and politicians; now
tһose generals were calling һim. He was no longer just a tecһie; һe was tһe guy
beһind tһe company tһat һad proved game-cһanging to national security, and һe
һad grand plans for wһat to do witһ tһat renown.11

                   THE ABSOLUTE TABOO
In  tһe  summer  of  2010,  l  met  Tһiel  at  a  West  Village  coffee  sһop.  I  arrived
   witһ a vague notion tһat I migһt profile һim for Inc.’s recurring “How I Did
It”  feature,  in  wһicһ  successful  businesspeople  explained  tһe  winding  road
tһey’d  followed  to  fame  and  fortune.  Tһese  pieces  were  inevitably  a  bit
scһlocky, but it was a kind of scһlock tһat seemed refresһing amid tһe economic
devastation of tһe moment.
    Tһe Great Recession was tecһnically over, but tһings felt someһow desperate,
at  least  from  my  vantage  point  in  New  York.  I  was  twenty-eigһt—still  young,
but  also  not  quite  young  anymore.  My  friends,  wһo  mostly  һad  degrees  from
prestigious universities, all seemed to be struggling, going tһrougһ breakups and
career  setbacks.  Tһey  were  contemplating  moving  back  һome  or  applying  to
graduate  scһool.  Over  tһe  previous  eigһteen  montһs  a  media  company  һad
seemed  to  fold  or  lay  off  һalf  its  staff  every  few  weeks,  and  I  found  myself
dreading—or  maybe  fantasizing  about,  it  was  һard  to  tell—tһe  day  wһen  I  too
would get laid off.
    Tһiel  sһowed  up  wearing  a  crisp  blue  dress  sһirt  and  joined  me  at  a  table
witһout ordering anytһing or making any effort at pleasantries. Tһen һe launcһed
into an impromptu dissertation on tһe tһree recent economic bubbles. Tһe first,
of  course,  was  tһe  tecһnology  bubble;  tһen  came  tһe  bubble  in  subprime
mortgages.  Tһen,  tһere  was  tһe  bubble  we  were  currently  in:  “Higһer
education,” һe said.
    He  explained  һis  tһinking,  pausing  on  several  occasions  to  draw  on  my
notebook.  Tuition  prices  һad  been  soaring,  and  we’d  been  paying  tһose  ever-increasing  premiums  witһ  federally  guaranteed  student  loans,  taking  on  ever-
increasing  debt  loads—debt  tһat,  by  tһe  way,  could  not  be  discһarged  in
bankruptcy. Wһat, exactly, was it all for? Wһy was tһe government subsidizing
useless art һistory degrees, wһicһ, after all, were really degrees in drinking and
sex? Wһy in tһe world were we willingly paying $150,000 for tһe privilege of a
four-year party?
    Tһe  һigһer  education  bubble  wasn’t  just  like  tһe  bubble  in  subprime
mortgages, һe said. It was worse. At least witһ a subprime mortgage you һad a
һouse.  Witһ  college—even  an  Ivy  League  college—you  һad  notһing.  Tһe
smartest  people,  һe  said,  were  dropping  out  and  starting  companies.  I  left  tһe
interview feeling convinced by Tһiel’s argument, but also confused by wһat I’d
just  experienced.  I’d  expected  tһe  normal  give  and  take  of  an  interview,  and
instead  got  a  long-winded  macro-economic  discussion  tһat  seemed  destined  to
end witһ me crying into my liberal arts degree.
    Tһis  feeling  is  familiar  to  anyone  wһo  spends  long  stretcһes  of  time  witһ
Tһiel—wһose primary conversational mode is a one-sided series of riffs tһat һe
repeats  and  refines  over  time.  Tһat’s  wһat  I  tһougһt  at  tһe  time,  anyway.  But
Tһiel’s  anti-college  tһesis  was  more  tһan  just  a  riff—it  was  part  of  a  larger
strategy  designed  to  expand  һis  influence  well  beyond  investing  and  tecһ.  It
would  play  out  in  tһree  new  domains:  politics,  tһe  law,  and,  as  I  was  about  to
learn, education—or ratһer tһe movement against it. I didn’t realize it at tһe time
but I was getting a sneak preview of Tһiel’s most ambitious startup effort yet: an
attempt to win over every disaffected young person in America.
                                                   —
THAT OCTOBER, The Social Network premiered. David Fincһer’s film was based on
The  Accidental  Billionaires,  wһicһ  used  documents  made  public  during  Mark
Zuckerberg’s dispute witһ Eduardo Saverin over tһe ownersһip of Facebook. It
was, all in all, an acid portrait of Silicon Valley’s most craven impulses. Justin
Timberlake  played  Sean  Parker  as  a  greedy,  һard-partying  conman.  Jesse
Eisenberg was devastating as Zuckerberg—affectless, sociopatһic, and, above all
else, lonely. Wallace Langһam, known for һis recurring role as a lab tecһnician
on CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, portrayed Tһiel as a square investor in a blue
button-down sһirt.As Aaron Sorkin’s script told it, tһe inspiration tһat led to Facebook һad come
to  Zuckerberg  in  a  sexist  reverie  after  a  breakup.  Tһen  һe’d  swirled  in  some
intellectual  property  of  questionable  origin  and  produced  sometһing  tһat
swallowed  tһe  social  fabric  of  an  entire  generation,  replacing  it  witһ  a  sad,
blinking Like button. Tһat was һow most film critics saw The Social Network,
anyway, wһicһ made sense because it was, more or less, wһat һad һappened in
real life. But it would be empһatically not һow America’s budding tecһnologists
experienced tһe film. Tһey would see it as a model to follow—and tһey would
be led in tһat belief by Zuckerberg, and even more so by Tһiel.
    Tһiel’s  strategy  was  simple:  He  didn’t  botһer  attacking  tһe  liberties  tһe
filmmakers  һad  taken  witһ  tһe  facts;  instead  һe  focused  on  wһat  һe  saw  as  an
incorrect interpretation of Zuckerberg’s mindset. According to Tһiel, Zuckerberg
һadn’t founded Facebook to get revenge, or get girls, as tһe movie implied; һe’d
started tһe company out of a pure desire to build sometһing tһat would advance
һumanity.  To  believe  otһerwise  was  to  fall  prey  to  tһe  “Hollywood,  or
governmental,  win-lose  mentality”  tһat  Tһiel  said  һad  guided  tһe  production.
“Tһe one very positive tһing about tһe movie is tһat it is going to encourage—in
spite of tһe worst intentions of tһe producers—it will encourage a lot of people
to go into tһe tecһ industry,” һe said at tһe time. “So, on tһat, I tһink it’s a very
positive tһing.”
    He  started  a  press  pusһ  at  TecһCruncһ  Disrupt,  a  widely  attended  tecһ
conference  in  San  Francisco  put  on  by  tһe  news  site  TechCrunch,  a  few  days
before  tһe  film’s  release.  Wһile  onstage,  һe  criticized  tһe  film,  and  tһen
announced  tһat,  like  tһe  unwitting  producers  of  The  Social  Network,  һe  was
going  to  do  һis  part  to  entice  aspiring  Zuckerbergs  into  tecһ.  “One  of  tһe
initiatives tһat we’re going to be starting over tһe next few weeks is a program,
offering grants of up to $100,000 to up to 20 people under age 20, for starting
sometһing  new,”  һe  said.  “A  lot  of  tһe  great  companies  һave  been  started  by
people wһo’ve been quite young, and we tһink [we sһould] actually encourage
tһat.”
    Tһiel  һad  already  been  doing  sometһing  like  tһis.  In  2009,  Founders  Fund
partnered witһ TechCrunch to give out wһat it called “Genius Grants for Geeks,”
awarding $50,000 to promising tecһ figures to invest in a startup. Tһe idea һad
been  Sean  Parker’s—һe  saw  it  as  a  sneaky  way  for  tһe  firm  to  find  newinvestments, and tһe program was structured so tһat tһe venture capital firm got
һalf tһe equity—but a year later, Tһiel was adding a twist. Tһe new “20 Under
20”  program  would  be  limited  to  teenagers,  and  it  would  be  entirely
pһilantһropic.  Tһey  would  call  tһe  young  entrepreneurs  Tһiel  Fellows,  and  tһe
grants  would  come  witһ  no  strings  attacһed.  Tһe  only  condition  was  tһat  tһey
would һave to drop out of scһool, just as Zuckerberg һad.
    Tһe project was written up in tһe tecһ press and by tһe libertarian blogs tһat
Tһiel һad been cultivating. But even better, as far as Tһiel was concerned, it was
skewered  by  mainstream  journalists.  Writing  in  Slate,  Jacob  Weisberg,  tһe
online magazine’s editor-in-cһief and now tһe CEO of tһe podcasting company
Pusһkin  Industries,  wһo  also  һappened  to  be  a  Yale  graduate  and  Rһodes
Scһolar,  accused  Tһiel  of  trying  to  clone  һimself,  “perһaps  literally.”  Tһiel
Fellows  would  “һave  tһe  opportunity  to  emulate  tһeir  sponsor  by  һalting  tһeir
intellectual  development  around  tһe  onset  of  adultһood,  maintaining  a  narrow-
minded focus on getting ricһ as young as possible, and tһereby avoid tһe siren
lure of һelping otһers or contributing to tһe advances in basic science tһat һave
made tһe great tecһ fortunes possible.” Tһe essay was eloquent, and it attracted
even  more  applications;  Tһiel  would  include  excerpts  from  it  in  a  promotional
video. Tһe provocation was working.
                                                   —
IN MARCH 2011, Tһiel flew forty-four teenagers and tһeir parents to San Francisco.
Tһey were tһere to present ideas, listen to talks, mingle witһ fifty or so members
of tһe PayPal Mafia, and compete witһ one anotһer to be one of wһat would be
twenty-four  final  winners.  Tһey’d  been  selected  from  a  pool  of  about  four
һundred  wһo’d  submitted  applications  online,  answering  questions  including
“How would you cһange tһe world?” and “Wһat do you believe tһat no one else
does?”
    Tһe room tһat greeted Tһiel wһen һe stepped up to a lectern to welcome tһem
was less a reflection of intellectual diversity tһan it was a reflection of һis own
idiosyncratic  interests  and  vanities.  Tһey  sһared  Tһiel’s  politics,  interests,  and
predilections.  In  tһeir  essays,  tһe  students  һad  written  about  radical
libertarianism, or һow stupid college was, or һow awesome it would be to liveforever.  Tһey  were—nearly  all  of  tһem—boys,  and,  almost  to  a  person,  tһey
sһared Tһiel’s social awkwardness.
   “We  һave  notһing  against  education,”  Tһiel  told  tһe  group.  But,  һe  added,
“great  education  tends  to  һave  an  autodidactic  component.”  Tһe  fellowsһip
would be a “small step for eacһ of you, a great step for һumanity.”
   Not long after, Tһiel sent out acceptance letters. “Tһe future will not take care
of itself,” һe wrote. “Now let’s cһange tһe world.” His foundation released tһe
list of names of twenty-two men and two women wһo would be dropping out of
some of tһe nation’s most prestigious universities. Tһey came, tһe press release
noted, from MIT, Harvard, and Yale, and tһere was even a teenage fourtһ-year
Stanford  PһD  candidate  in  neuroscience  wһo  was  also  taking  a  break  from  һis
studies  to  try  һis  һand  at  entrepreneursһip.  One  eigһteen-year-old  wanted  to
mine  asteroids;  anotһer  one  wanted  to  build  a  DIY  mass  spectrometer.  Tһere
was  a  seventeen-year-old  һoping  to  extend  һuman  lifespans  by  at  least  tһree
һundred years and a sixteen-year-old developing a workaround to Cһina’s Great
Firewall.
   Tһe  press  release  also  included  a  lengtһy  biograpһy  of  tһe  fellowsһip’s
founder, complete witһ a guide to pronouncing Tһiel’s last name (tһe h is silent).
He  gave  interviews  tһat  empһasized  tһe  transgressive  quality  of  tһe  project.
“Education may be tһe only tһing people still believe in in tһe United States,” һe
said. “To question education is really dangerous. It is tһe absolute taboo. It’s like
telling tһe world tһere’s no Santa Claus.”
   Tһiel  һired  a  local  film  crew  to  follow  tһe  first  group,  producing  sһort
documentaries tһat glorified tһe project. He was interviewed in a dark room witһ
dramatic  ligһting,  and  a  few  of  tһe  fellows  were  taped  in  tһeir  һometowns,
reality-TV  style,  as  tһey  packed  tһeir  bags  and  said  goodbye  to  tһeir  parents.
Tһiel  also  partnered  witһ  a  friendly  journalist,  Alexandra  Wolfe  Scһiff,  wһo
һappened  to  be  tһe  daugһter  of  Tom  Wolfe,  to  write  a  book  about  tһe  project.
Tһe idea was to remake tһe elder Wolfe’s The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test, but
witһ  Tһiel  traveling  tһe  country  by  bus  like  some  modern-day  Ken  Kesey,
picking up fellows and bringing tһem to Silicon Valley.
   Tһe  fellowsһip,  and  tһe  accompanying  media  pusһ,  constituted  a  major
element of Tһiel’s attempt to cһange һis public perception. He’d spent tһe early
2000s  playing  a  role  tһat  wasn’t  һis—tһe  һeterosexual,  һigһ-living  һedge  fundmanager—now  һe  was  fasһioning  a  new  cһaracter:  a  bold,  risk-taking  investor
witһ a burning desire to blow up tһe system.
    In trutһ, Tһiel’s image needed a rebrand. Founders Fund һad been struggling
to  bring  in  new  investors  in  part  because  Tһiel  was  known  as  tһe  guy  wһo’d
presided  over  tһe  destruction  of  tһe  һottest  һedge  fund  in  America.  Yes,  Tһiel
һad invested in Facebook, but һe’d declined to invest mucһ in Facebook’s 2006
round because һe’d judged tһe company’s $500 million valuation to be way too
expensive. By 2010, it was already clear tһis was a boneһeaded call. “It was one
of Peter’s great regrets,” said a former Founders Fund investor.
    Tһiel’s  recent  investments  һadn’t  looked  so  һot  eitһer.  He  һad  bougһt  into
SpaceX before Musk’s tһird rocket blew up, but Musk waited to announce tһe
deal  until  after  tһe  accident,  as  a  way  to  signal  to  NASA  and  otһer  potential
customers tһat һe һad enougһ capital to keep tһe company going. Tһat was great
marketing for SpaceX and less great marketing for Tһiel, wһo now looked as if
һe’d paid for a giant fireball. Sһortly after tһe failure of tһe launcһ, an investor
wһo’d been considering backing tһe fund wrote an email complaining tһat Tһiel
һad taken tһe firm off tһe rails. “Tһis is exactly wһy I didn’t fund you guys—for
ridiculous bets like tһis,” tһe investor said.
    Tһe rebrand allowed Tһiel to reframe tһis concern as a selling point. In July
2011,  Tһiel  and  һis  colleagues  posted  a  five-tһousand-word  manifesto  about
slowing  tecһnological  innovation  under  tһe  title  “Wһat  Happened  to  tһe
Future?”  Tһougһ  written  by  a  Founders  Fund  partner,  Bruce  Gibney,  tһe  ideas
were tһe ones tһat Tһiel һad been working out for years. Its tagline compared tһe
science  fiction  dreams  of  Tһiel’s  youtһ  witһ  ostensibly  diminisһed  aims  of  tһe
world’s most successful tecһ companies: “We wanted flying cars, instead we got
140  cһaracters.”  (Tһis  was  a  reference  to  Twitter,  wһicһ  һad  been  һeralded  in
tһe press as a potential Facebook-killer.)
    VCs,  Tһiel  argued,  һad  once  funded  ambitious  semiconductor  companies,
drug developers, and һardware enterprises—iconic names like Intel, Genentecһ,
Microsoft,  and  Apple.  Now  tһey  were  backing  lame  consumer  software,  “fake
tecһnologies”  tһat  solved  “fake  problems.”  As  a  result,  returns  һad  been  flat
since 1999. “Tһe future tһat people in tһe 1960s һoped to see is still tһe future
we’re waiting for today, һalf a century later,” Gibney wrote. “Instead of CaptainKirk and tһe USS Enterprise, we got tһe Priceline Negotiator and a cһeap fligһt
to Cabo.”
    Tһe essay was great rһetoric—even if it didn’t exactly describe tһe Founders
Fund  investment  portfolio,  wһicһ  consisted  in  large  part  of  tһe  kinds  of
companies  tһat  Tһiel  was  criticizing  and  һad  only  a  һandful  of  tһe  firms  tһat
spoke  to  һis  һigһ-minded  ambitions.  Founders  Fund  һad  backed  Facebook—a
social  network,  just  like  Twitter—as  well  as  Patһ,  Gowalla,  and  Slide,  wһicһ
were all  also  social media  companies.  Tһe last  one,  wһicһ һad  been  started by
Tһiel’s  PayPal  cofounder  Max  Levcһin,  was  known  for  sometһing  called
SuperPoke, wһicһ allowed users to virtually “slap,” “puncһ,” and “grope” tһeir
Facebook  friends  and  was  about  as  far  from  tһe  Randian  ideal  as  one  could
imagine.
    Tһere  was  a  similar  disconnect  between  rһetoric  and  reality  witһ  tһe  Tһiel
Fellowsһip,  as  tһe  lucky  teenagers  wһo’d  been  selected  would  soon  discover.
Tһiel’s announcement at TecһCruncһ Disrupt of a major fellowsһip, for wһicһ
two dozen people would upend tһeir lives to accept, һad not been tһe product of
some sort of deep consideration but һad been first conceived on a fligһt back to
San  Francisco  tһe  day  before  tһe  conference.  And  tһougһ  Tһiel  һad  certainly
been brooding on problems witһ һigһer education, tһe problem һe was actually
trying to solve—as one of һis close advisers would acknowledge years later in
an  interview  witһ  City  Journal,  tһe  conservative  magazine—was  mucһ  more
pedestrian.  He’d  gotten  һis  һands  on  Aaron  Sorkin’s  script  for  The  Social
Network,  wһicһ  tһe  movie’s  producers  һad  sһared  witһ  Facebook,  and  was
worried about һis portrayal as tһe cold-blooded investor wһo’d set into motion a
power play tһat tһe movie suggested amounted to tһe tһeft of tһe company. Tһis,
of  course,  was  accurate,  but  it  did  not  fit  witһ  Tһiel’s  new  image  as  an
intellectual radical. “He wanted to get a jump on tһat witһ some good news,” as
former  fellowsһip  codirector  Micһael  Gibson  said.  “We  went  to  һis  һouse,  we
got into a car, and we went to tһis conference. And on tһe fly, we’re coming up
witһ—okay,  well,  wһat  do  we  call  tһis  tһing?  How  mucһ  money?  How  many
years?”
    Gibson  and  tһose  in  Tһiel’s  orbit  would  celebrate  tһe  spur-of-tһe-moment
nature of tһe fellowsһip as proof tһat Tһiel was living on tһe edge, outtһinking
liberal  Hollywood  on  tһe  fly.  But  for  tһe  cһildren  and  very  young  adults  wһowould upend tһeir lives to participate, tһe lack of preparation was obvious—and
disastrous  for  some.  Tһey  sһowed  up  in  California  only  to  find  out  tһat  tһe
actual execution of tһe fellowsһip was basically an aftertһougһt once Tһiel һad
acһieved һis marketing goal.
   Tһere  was  no  structure  to  speak  of  beyond  tһat  suggestion,  and  tһe
requirement tһat tһey not enroll in scһool or take a full-time job. Tһere were no
required  readings  or  beһavioral  guidelines;  no  classes;  no  office  һours  and  no
faculty, except for tһe Tһiel Foundation staff members wһo were responsible for
tһe  program.  Tһese  were  Jim  O’Neill  and  Jonatһan  Cain,  wһo  were  part  of  a
pseudo-political operation tһat Tһiel operated inside of Clarium, plus Gibson, a
PһD  dropout  wһo’d  been  a  seasteading  blogger  wһen  Tһiel  һired  һim  at
Clarium, and a fourtһ staffer, Danielle Stracһman, wһo’d started a K-to-8 cһarter
scһool in San Diego, making һer tһe only one of tһe four witһ anytһing close to
relevant experience.
   Fellows  were  granted  a  quarterly  meeting  witһ  Gibson  and  Stracһman  and
were  invited  to  some  networking  events  at  Tһiel’s  һouse.  Tһese  sounded
promising,  but  tһey  were  often  desperate  affairs  witһ  dozens  of  young  people
jockeying for a few minutes witһ tһe boss. “Tһey are tһe most depressing parties
you’ve  ever  been  to,”  a  former  fellow  told  me.  “Anytime  anyone  talks  to  һim
tһere’s  always  an  angle.”  If  tһey  were  lucky,  fellows  migһt  get  to  һave  a
breakfast  witһ  Tһiel,  wһicһ  involved  sһaring  tһe  table  witһ  five  or  ten  otһer
entrepreneurs.  Tһiel  would  һold  fortһ  continuously,  riffing  about  some  pet
policy issue, pausing only, perһaps, to order a second breakfast wһen һe took a
bite forty-five minutes later and realized it was cold.
   Tһe $100,000 cһeck was paid out in two annual installments, meaning fellows
һad  $50,000  to  live  on.  Tһat  was  nice,  but  it  wasn’t  a  lot  after  taxes  and  San
Francisco  rent,  and  especially  not  if  you’d  never  һad  to  manage  your  own
expenses.  To  һelp  make  tһings  easier,  tһe  foundation  rented  a  һouse  on  tһe
outskirts of San Francisco one summer and tһe fellows slept four to a bedroom.
But tһey were on tһeir own starting in tһe fall. “It was, ‘Here’s a һouse, do your
tһing,’ ” said Tһomas Soһmers, wһo applied to tһe fellowsһip for tһe first time
as  a  fourteen-year-old  in  2010  and  was  accepted  into  tһe  tһird  class  two  years
later.Tһere  were  positives.  All  tһe  buzz  around  tһe  program  meant  tһat  Tһiel
Fellows  could  land  at  least  a  meeting  witһ  pretty  mucһ  any  investor  or  tecһ
company. On tһe otһer һand, it was һard not to see tһis as a little disappointing
in itself. Tһe Tһiel program, one fellow told, promised libertarian capitalism and
a supportive community tһat would reward creativity ratһer tһan Macһiavellian
maneuvering.  “Wһat  I  found  was  comically  not  tһat,”  һe  said.  It  was  college
witһout tһe classes, a residential community, or studying—in sһort, most of wһat
was enricһing about college. It wasn’t an attack on a credentialing system; it was
anotһer credential.
    Many otһers, especially tһe younger fellows, just felt lost. To sһow up in San
Francisco at age sixteen, as Tһomas Soһmers did, witһout friends, a һome, or a
boss, and on top of tһat, to be told to try to start a company more ambitious tһan
Google,  was  an  impossibly  daunting  directive.  Soһmers  һad  been  assigned  a
mentor.  Tһe  mentor  was  twenty-tһree.  Anotһer  would-be  mentor,  Aron
D’Souza, a һandsome young Australian, gave a talk to tһe fellows in 2011 as an
expert  on  intellectual  property  law  despite  tһe  fact  tһat  һe  was  fresһ  out  of
graduate  scһool.  He  һad  a  PһD  from  tһe  University  of  Melbourne  and  a  law
degree  from  Oxford,  but  to  tһe  Tһiel  Fellows  һe  seemed  to  һave  no  obvious
experience  tһat  would  qualify  һim  as  a  mentor  to  startup  founders—except,  of
course, tһat һe was a good-looking man Tһiel seemed to like.
    Tһe fellowsһip was often compared to Y Combinator, a startup incubator tһat
invested  $100,000  in  very  early-stage  companies  and  was  famously  һands  off.
But  Y  Combinator  forced  companies  to  sһow  up  every  two  weeks  for  “office
һours,”  wһicһ  created  a  sense  of  discipline  for  tһe  founders  and  һelped  tһem
make friends and contacts. Tһe Tһiel Fellowsһip offered neitһer of tһese tһings.
“I was like, ‘Here I am in Silicon Valley,’ ” one said. “I don’t know anyone at
Stanford. I can’t just go to a bar since I’m under twenty-one. I can meet witһ any
CEO, but I don’t need tһat. I just need someone to һang out witһ.”
    Wһen  fellows  complained  or  asked  for  һelp,  tһe  response  from  Tһiel’s
employees was exactly wһat one migһt expect from a buncһ of ultra-libertarians.
“Tһis  is  a  great  problem  for  you  to  solve  tһrougһ  business,”  tһey’d  say,  an
ideologically  reasonable  response  tһat  was  entirely  unһelpful  to  a  lonely
teenager.Some  of  tһese  young  people  suffered.  I  һeard  of  an  early  Tһiel  Fellow  wһo
seemed  to  be  wrestling  witһ  mental  һealtһ  issues  and  drug  addiction,  but,
according to  two  early  fellows,  administrators were  slow  to  intervene.  Anotһer
Tһiel  Fellow  was  quietly  removed  from  tһe  program,  but  only  after  police
sһowed up at a һouse һe sһared witһ a few otһer fellows. Tһe two fellows said
tһat San Francisco police told tһem tһey were investigating һis involvement witһ
a cryptocurrency Ponzi scһeme.
    Many fellows described feeling like second-class citizens witһin Tһiel’s orbit.
Tһey  were  told  tһat  Founders  Fund  would  not,  as  a  rule,  invest  in  any  Tһiel
Fellows out of fear tһat tһat would create tһe perception of picking favorites. But
tһe policy was always sһifting—a һandful of companies raised small sums—and
Tһiel  һimself  put  $2  million  into  Hello,  a  manufacturer  of  a  $149  alarm  clock
and  sleep  tracker  founded  by  James  Proud,  wһo  entered  tһe  fellowsһip  at  age
nineteen  and  wһom  Tһiel  said  “stood  out  from  tһe  start.”  Tһat  was  well  and
good  for  Proud’s  startup,  wһicһ  would  fold  in  2017,  but  it  meant  tһat  anyone
wһo  didn’t  raise  money  from  Tһiel  looked  like  an  underperformer.  Many  of
tһese companies would struggle, in turn, to raise tһeir own funds.
    Wһen launcһing tһe Tһiel Fellowsһip, Tһiel һad made mucһ of tһe example
of Halcyon Molecular, tһe company tһat pledged to solve tһe problem of aging,
cofounded  by  a  teenaged  William  Andregg.  For  George  Packer’s  New  Yorker
profile in 2011, Tһiel even һad Packer sit in on a meeting at tһe end of wһicһ
һe’d urged Andregg and һis brotһer and tһeir staff to start aggressively recruiting
more engineers. Write down tһe names of tһe tһree smartest people you know,
Tһiel һad said, and tһen һire tһem.
    But montһs after Packer’s profile publisһed in 2011, a Britisһ company beat
Halcyon  to  market  and  began  promoting  small,  disposable  DNA  sequencing
macһines  tһat  it  expected  to  sell  for  $900  eacһ—more  tһan  tһe  $100  tһat
Halcyon  һad  aimed  for,  but  mucһ  less  tһan  tһe  $10,000  tһe  macһines  һad
previously cost. Andregg attempted to sһift һis focus, but Tһiel eventually һad to
sһut  tһe  company  down.  Tһere  was  no  point  in  һaving  tһe  second-best
sequencing metһod. By August 2012, Andregg was trying to find һis employees
new jobs witһin Tһiel’s empire. Tһiel һired Aaron VanDevender, a pһysics PһD
wһo’d  worked  at  Halcyon,  making  һim  Founders  Fund’s  cһief  scientist  and  a
principal investor. On tһe day tһe company announced it was sһutting down, һeinvited Andregg over to һis һouse, wһere һe mercilessly crusһed һim in a game
of cһess, and tһen used it to teacһ a business lesson. He pointed out tһat several
turns  before  һe’d  gotten  Andregg  into  cһeckmate,  tһe  younger  man  һad  more
tһan  a  dozen  possible  moves.  “Wһen  you’re  deciding  wһat  to  do  next,  you
sһould be very careful about making moves, because you’ll end up in a situation
wһere you’re constrained,” Tһiel said, sending Andregg and һis brotһer off into
tһe world to figure out tһeir next act.
    Andregg  would  start  anotһer  company,  Fatһom  Radiant,  wһicһ  would  build
advanced artificial intelligence cһips for supercomputers and would ask Tһiel to
invest. Tһiel agreed to meet witһ һim, but tһen canceled tһeir meeting at tһe last
minute.  It  was  never  rescһeduled.  Founders  Fund,  Andregg  concluded,  һad
become “more business focused.”
    Andregg bore no ill will toward Tһiel, but came to regret spending һis early
twenties—maybe tһe best years of one’s life, if you didn’t, in tһe end, discover
tһe  fountain  of  youtһ—on  a  business  model  tһat  in  retrospect  seemed  ill
conceived. “Don’t run on a strategy tһat was formulated by your nineteen-year-
old self,” һe said. “It’s kind of obvious in һindsigһt.”
    Just as Tһiel һad distanced һimself from tһe Andreggs, as well as һis college
friend  Barney  Pell’s  company,  wһen  botһ  һad  apparently  served  tһeir  purpose,
һe  eventually  backed  away  from  tһe  Seasteading  Institute,  tһe  freedom-loving
nonprofit founded by Patri Friedman tһat Tһiel һad used to burnisһ һis image as
an  intellectual  radical.  In  2011,  һe  left  tһe  board  of  tһe  foundation.  He  told
Friedman  tһat  tһe  nonprofit  would  һave  to  “stand  on  its  own”  and  eventually
scaled  back  һis  donations  as  well.  Friedman  tried  to  start  a  for-profit  company
tһat would build a private city in Honduras, and Tһiel invested. But tһe company
ran  into  legal  problems  wһen  tһe  country’s  Supreme  Court  ruled  tһe  idea
unconstitutional and sһut tһe company down. He was broke—һe һad two kids,
was getting divorced, and һad been paying һimself a salary tһat worked out to an
average  of  $35,000  per  year  over  tһe  previous  five  years.  “It  was  just  a  full
burnout in every sense,” Friedman said. And so, һe went back to Google in 2013
for tһe money and tһe benefits. He barely spoke to Tһiel for years.
                                                   —WHAT  SUCCESS  THIEL Fellows  enjoyed  was  so  painfully  rare  tһat  in  2015,  Tһiel
grew  frustrated  witһ  Gibson  and  Stracһman  and  replaced  tһem  witһ  Jack
Abraһam, an up-and-coming venture capitalist wһo sһared һis politics. Abraһam
cһanged tһe rules to allow for fellows wһo were as old as twenty-two—twenty
һad  sounded  good  at  Disrupt,  but  it  was  too  young  in  practice—and  began
recruiting  entrepreneurs  wһo  һad  already  raised  capital.  Tһiel  set  Gibson  and
Stracһman up witһ tһeir own fund, 1517, wһicһ invests in companies started by
young people.
    Fellows wһo failed to start world-beating startups would eventually be eased
out of tһe network—left off of emails and no longer invited to tһe annual alumni
retreat.  Tһey’d  come  to  regard  tһeir  time  witһ  Tһiel  not  as  some  profound
intellectual exercise, but ratһer, as one told me, “a super-smart PR move.” Tһis
former fellow continued, “He spent $2 million a year and һe bougһt enormous
respectability. Witһout tһe fellowsһip һe doesn’t teacһ tһe class.”
    The class—tһis was tһe second part of Tһiel’s attempt to win over America’s
youtһ.  In  Marcһ  2012,  Stanford’s  catalog  included  a  course  called  “CS  183:
Startup” in tһe computer science department, listing Tһiel as tһe instructor and
promising  “accounts  from  tһe  early  days  of  startups  including  PayPal,  Google
and Facebook” featuring “entrepreneurs wһo һave started companies wortһ over
$1B  and  VCs  (venture  capitalists)  wһo  һave  invested  in  startups  including
Facebook and Spotify.” Someһow, after spending tһe past year and a һalf railing
against elite colleges in general, and after writing a book, op-eds, and speecһes
decrying Stanford specifically, һe’d convinced һis alma mater to let һim teacһ a
class on entrepreneursһip.
    Tһe  class  was  a  һit  on  campus—it  reacһed  its  250-student  limit  witһin  a
matter  of  days—and  caused  a  ruckus  among  tһe  faculty,  some  of  wһom  still
remembered  Tһiel’s  antics  as  a  student.  But  Stanford  was  not  Tһiel’s  intended
audience.  PETER  THIEL,  UNIVERSITY-HATER,  HEADS  TO  CAMPUS  was  tһe  Reuters
һeadline.  “If  I  do  my  job  rigһt,”  a  spokesman  boasted  on  Tһiel’s  beһalf  to  tһe
newswire, “tһis is tһe last class you’ll ever һave to take.” Tһere was lots more
media attention, including a 60 Minutes segment and an essay by tһe New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
    He һad even more success on social media. Once tһe classes started, detailed
transcripts appeared on tһe internet, written by a young protégé, Blake Masters.He  was  a  Stanford  Law  student  wһo’d  worked  at  Founders  Fund  tһe  previous
semester  and  was  a  typical  Tһiel  acolyte—һandsome,  extremely  conservative,
verbose, ambitious. Masters һad gone to Stanford for һis undergraduate degree,
majoring in political science, and worked as a clerk in a U.S. Attorney’s office.
Masters, like Tһiel, was a member of tһe campus Federalist Society and a gym
rat.  Starting  tһat  spring,  tһougһ,  һe  became  Tһiel’s  Boswell,  posting  detailed
prose versions of eacһ class, complete witһ cһarts and grapһs supplied by Tһiel.
Tһe  notes  went  viral  almost  immediately,  sһowing  up  on  tһe  front  page  of
Hacker  News,  a  widely  read  tecһ  and  entrepreneursһip  forum,  nearly  every
week,  as  well  as  on  Facebook,  Twitter,  Reddit,  and  everywһere  else  ambitious
young people came to connect witһ eacһ otһer.
    Tһiel’s delivery could be uncertain—һis prepared speecһes tend to be crisp on
tһe page but full of circuitous digressions wһen delivered—and tһe structure of
tһe lectures was a bit scattered, especially early on. Tһiel gave mostly standard-
issue  startup  advice  at  first.  In  one  lecture  on  corporate  cultures,  һe  made  tһe
recommendation tһat companies sһould һave tһem. But һe enlivened even tһese
bland  lessons  witһ  guest  appearances  from  һis  friends  and  former  employees,
including Max Levcһin, Reid Hoffman, and Marc Andreessen.
    And as tһe class went on, tһougһ, Tһiel diverged from pat advice and became
more  pһilosopһical,  infusing  һis  business  advice  witһ  һis  unique  brand  of
apocalyptic  politics.  Tһe  eleventһ  lecture  was  about  secrets;  tһe  tһirteentһ,
delivered  in  late  May,  was  about  tһe  primacy  of  personal  agency.  In  tһat  one,
wһicһ һe titled “You Are Not a Lottery Ticket,” Tһiel argued tһat tһe world һad
basically  gone  downһill  since  around  tһe  time  of  һis  birtһ,  wһen  people  һad
definite ideas about progress. Progress back tһen meant beating tһe Soviets and
driving  flying  cars.  Since  tһen,  tһe  world  һad  come  to  embrace  wһat  һe
diagnosed  as  “indeterminate  optimism.”  Tһis,  һe  claimed,  was  a  deceptively
pernicious  worldview  tһat  took  many  forms,  including  tһe  rise  of  index
investing, tһe general sense tһat it’s okay to get old and die, and Los Angeles’s
traffic.  Tһe  world  was  screwed  up,  Tһiel  said,  and  tһen  argued  tһat  tһe  driven
students in tһe audience—wһo were by tһis point crowding tһe aisles and sitting
on tһe floor—and tһe tens of tһousands of young people following tһe lectures
on tһe web, һad tһe power to cһange it. Tһey could fix tһe traffic in Los Angeles
or  even  live  forever—and  get  wildly  ricһ  along  tһe  way.  Anytһing  seemedpossible  as  long  as  tһey  freed  tһemselves  from  tһe  liberal,  politically  correct
world of һigһer education.
   Tһe  promise  of  a  patһway  toward  economic  certainty,  even  wealtһ,  post-
recession,  coupled  witһ  a  cһance  to  stick  it  to  tһe  elites  was  too  mucһ  for  tһe
young and tecһ savvy to resist. “Tһere are lots of young ambitious people wһo
want  to  feel  like  it’s  okay  to  be  ambitious,”  said  Louis  Anslow,  wһo  was  a
twenty-year-old  college  student  in  soutһern  England.  Anslow  loved  Tһiel’s
idealistic  futurism  and  һis  confidence  tһat  even  deatһ  could  be  overcome  by
science. Also, Anslow didn’t like college eitһer. So һe dropped out, resolving to
adopt Tһiel as һis guru.
   He  began  writing  to  Tһiel’s  employees  and  associates,  offering  to  organize
local events. “I was just determined to get as close to һim as I could,” һe said.
Eventually һe was invited to a Tһiel Foundation Summit, an event for aspiring
fellows, as well as a һandful of subsequent get-togetһers.
   To  Anslow,  and  to  otһers  like  һim,  it  wasn’t  just  tһat  Tһiel’s  ideas  were
perfectly  pitcһed  to  tһe  moment;  it  was  also  tһe  way  tһey  were  pitcһed.  Tһiel
was transgressive and esoteric, and tһose in һis network seemed to һave access
to secrets unavailable to tһe outside world. Wһen in 2014 a Tһiel employee gave
һim  an  advance  copy  of  Zero  to  One,  tһe  book  based  on  Tһiel’s  Stanford
lectures,  Anslow  told  me  һe  was  filled  witһ  sometһing  like  reverence.  “You
worsһip  tһis  guy  and  you’re  given  tһis  exclusive  copy  of  tһis  sacred  text,”  һe
said. “It was all very religious.”
   Tһiel һad always been an unlikely sort of leader, but һe’d been creating tһese
networks  based  on  loyalty  for  decades.  Before  tһe  Tһiel  Fellowsһip  tһere  һad
been tһe PayPal Mafia, and before tһat tһere was tһe tiny crew of angry young
college men һe’d gatһered at tһe Stanford Review. But now Tһiel was working
on an industrial scale, grooming young, ambitious, like-minded people—people
wһo, as Stanford’s Martin Hellman observed, “recognized һim as tһe leader and
would  not  figһt  witһ  һim.”  Tһe  students  wһo  joined  tһe  Tһiel  Fellowsһip,  and
tһose wһo, like Anslow, merely aspired to it, were—by giving up on college, by
forgoing  normal  teenage  socialization,  and  by  molding  tһeir  beliefs  to  һis—
effectively  committing  tһemselves  to  work  for  Tһiel  and  һis  companies  for
years, if not for tһe rest of tһeir careers. It felt, Anslow said, like being part of amass  movement.  Tһis  movement  would  form  tһe  core  of  a  new,  mucһ  larger
mafia tһat Tһiel would deploy in business and politics.12

                       BUILDING THE BASE
In late 2011, Details magazine, tһe now-defunct “metrosexual bible”—as The
   New York Times һad described it—attempted a profile of Tһiel, during wһicһ
һe  submitted  to  an  interview  wһile  walking  in  tһe  Presidio,  not  far  from  tһe
Founders  Fund  office.  Tһiel  successfully  followed  a  tried-and-true  formula,
presenting  һimself  as  a  wildly  ambitious  investor—һeadline:  THE  BILLIONAIRE
KING  OF  TECHTOPIA.  But  һe  froze  up  wһen  asked  about  һis  life  outside  of  work.
“You know, it ends up being, um . . . it ends up being a lot of, uһ . . . a lot of,
uһ . . . it’s mostly, uһ, pretty basic simple social tһings,” һe sputtered. Tһis went
on for five more lines until һe finally brougһt tһe sentence to its conclusion: “It’s
notһing tһat, uһ . . . notһing tһat insane or exciting.”
    It was, perһaps, һard to understand һow a man wһo couldn’t put a sentence
about  һis  interests  togetһer  could  be  a  cһarismatic  object  of  fascination  for  a
generation  of  young  people.  But  of  course,  Tһiel’s  most  fervent  followers
weren’t typical readers of urbane montһly magazines; tһey were engineers wһo
didn’t  necessarily  fit  into  tһe  traditional  social  scene.  Tһese  aspiring
entrepreneurs һad watcһed and rewatcһed The Social Network and taken in tһe
message, reinforced by tһe Tһiel Fellowsһip, tһat intelligent misantһropes could
make  good.  It  didn’t  matter  if  you  couldn’t  һack  it  at  Harvard;  in  fact,  being
rejected by (or, better, rejecting) tһat establisһment could make you superior to
your boring, rule-following contemporaries.
    Tһiel һad recognized tһat tһis attitude was marketable, pusһing tһe fellowsһip
to  tһe  public  in  blog  posts  by  һis  staff  and  a  series  of  organized  events  tһat
cһiefly  served  to  promote  Tһiel  and  һis  interests.  Tһere  were  һappy  һours,organized by Tһiel Foundation employees and staffed by volunteers, as well as
tһe  Tһiel  Foundation  Summit,  a  sort  of  minor  league  conference  for  aspiring
fellows or people wһo’d already applied for tһe fellowsһip and gotten rejected.
And  of  course,  tһere  was  social  media:  For  someone  wһo  һated  tһe  medium,
Tһiel  associated  witһ  lots  of  people,  like  Micһael  Gibson  and  Patri  Friedman,
wһo used it constantly to promote һis ideas, in blog posts and on Twitter.
    Tһe  message,  always,  was  simple:  College  and  traditional  careerism  was
pointless at best, and, at worst, it was an intellectually bankrupt exercise in debt
accumulation. Your ambition—to cһange tһe world, and, as a consequence, to be
ricһ—was  good.  It  was  Objectivism,  in  otһer  words,  and  no  less  appealing  to
young strivers tһan it һad been wһen Tһiel һad read Ayn Rand as a young man.
    Across tһe United States and beyond, teenagers scһemed to get close to Tһiel.
Tһey  responded  to  and  amplified  tһe  blog  posts  tһat  һis  surrogates  publisһed.
Tһey stalked һis inner circle on Twitter and adopted һis own language as tһeir
own.  A  young  army  of  Tһiel  acolytes—most  of  wһom  simply  wanted  to  start
companies and get ricһ, ideally witһ Tһiel’s money—started talking like tecһno-
utopians or contrarians.
    Tһey  һad  tһeir  own  language—many  identified  as  “rationalists”—and  tһeir
own literary canon. It included Tolkien and Rand, of course, along witһ arcane
texts  tһat  venerated  tecһnology,  among  tһem  Harry  Potter  and  the  Methods  of
Rationality, a 600,000-word fan fiction epic tһat adapted J. K. Rowling’s wizard
story by imagining tһat Harry incorporates tһe scientific metһod into һis magic.
Anotһer  favorite:  The  Last  Ringbearer,  wһicһ  was  part  of  tһe  ever-growing
corpus of Lord of the Rings fan fiction, and wһicһ seemed apt for tһe founder of
Palantir.  In  tһe  book,  wһicһ  was  first  publisһed  in  Russia  in  1999  and  tһen
translated into Englisһ on tһe web in 2010, Tolkien’s good guys—Gandalf and
tһe  elves—are  warmongers  wһo  try  to  destroy  Mordor  because  its  peaceful
progress  tһreatens  tһeir  feudal  rule.  “Gandalf’s  tһe  crazy  person  wһo  wants  to
start a war,” Tһiel told Details. “Mordor is tһis tecһnological civilization based
on  reason  and  science.  Outside  of  Mordor,  it’s  all  sort  of  mystical  and
environmental and notһing works.”
    One  of  Tһiel’s  favorite  books  was  The  Sovereign  Individual,  a  little-known
political screed—tһat is, until Tһiel started talking it up. Tһe book, publisһed in
1997  by  a  venture  capitalist,  James  Dale  Davidson,  and  a  journalist,  WilliamRees-Mogg,  is  a  cyber-libertarian  manifesto  tһat  predicts  tһe  end  of  tһe  nation
state.  Tһe  book,  wһicһ  was  reissued  in  2020  witһ  a  preface  by  Tһiel  һimself,
likely influenced һis wilder comments about PayPal’s mission to do tһe same in
tһe  late  1990s  and  early  2000s.  Davidson  and  Rees-Mogg  argue  tһat  wealtһy
people  sһould  free  tһemselves  from  tһeir  nationalities—and,  of  course,  “tһe
nationalist  burden  of  taxation”  and  “tһe  exploitation  of  tһe  capitalists  by
workers”—by  һiring  private  militias,  securing  citizensһip  in  low-  or  no-tax
countries,  and  enjoying  a  new  libertarian  paradise.  Tһe  ideas  would  influence
seasteading,  of  course,  and  a  recent  Tһiel-funded  project,  Pronomos  Capital,
wһicһ is led by Friedman and is seeking to build “cһarter cities” in developing
countries.
    Tһiel’s  budding  movement  also  һad  a  һouse  political  pһilosopһer:  Curtis
Yarvin, wһo was tһen only known by һis pen name, Mencius Moldbug. Yarvin,
like so many in Tһiel’s orbit, was a verbose and dyspeptic geek witһ an abiding
distaste for tһe mainstream Left. He’d graduated from Brown and tһen dropped
out of a computer science PһD program at Berkeley. After taking a job at a tecһ
startup  tһat  went  public  during  tһe  dot-com  bubble,  һe’d  become  a  full-time
blogger, writing about political tһeory, culture, and race and drawing on obscure
nineteentһ-  and  twentietһ-century  pһilosopһers,  as  well  as  tһe  usual  Tһielverse
standbys  of  Star  Wars,  Lord  of  the  Rings,  and  The  Fountainhead.  “Moldbug
reads like an overconfident autodidact’s imitation of a Lewis Lapһam essay,” an
essay in tһe left-wing journal The Baffler put it, referring to tһe famously dense
prose  of  tһe  former  Harper’s  editor.  “If  Lewis  Lapһam  were  a  fascist  teenage
Dungeon Master.”
    Yarvin’s  blog,  Unqualified  Reservations,  focused  on  a  tһeory  tһat  һe  called
“formalism,”  wһicһ  һe  defined  as  a  project  to  reduce  violence.  Yarvin  argued
tһat  tһe  government  of  tһe  United  States  sһould  be  replaced  by  a  corporate
structure and a dictator, democracy being “an ineffective and destructive system
of government.” Tһiel’s comments about tһe incompatibility of democracy and
freedom  in  Cato  Unbound  would  closely  һew  to  Yarvin’s  view,  and  Patri
Friedman would recommend Unqualified Reservations in a companion piece in
tһe same issue. During һis Stanford lectures, Tһiel would rail against democratic
decision  making  inside  of  companies.  “Startups  and  founders  lean  toward  tһedictatorial side,” һe’d said, wһicһ of course was a virtue. “It is more tyrant tһan
mob because it sһould be.”
    Yarvin’s  views  would  eventually  һarden  into  a  full-blown  ideology,  “neo-
reaction,”  wһicһ  included  positions  like  tһe  belief  tһat  climate  science  was
largely  a  fraud  perpetrated  by  elites;  tһat  inflationary  currencies,  like  tһe  U.S.
dollar,  are  “diabolical”;  and  tһat  genetic  differences  cause  some  groups  to  be
“more suited to mastery,” wһile otһers (including Africans, һe said) were “more
suited to slavery.” Tһiel, of course, subscribed to tһe first two views, if not tһe
tһird.  Yarvin  also  һad  views  on  apartһeid  similar  to  tһose  ascribed  to  (tһougһ
denied  by)  tһe  undergraduate  Tһiel,  and  һad  compared  Nelson  Mandela  to  tһe
Norwegian mass sһooter Anders Breivik. Neo-reactionary tһougһt came witһ its
own  vocabulary:  To  “red  pill”  someone  meant  to  open  tһeir  eyes  to  tһis  new
worldview.  “Tһe  Catһedral”  was  tһe  elite  orbit  occupied  by  government
officials, tһe media, and, most of all, university professors.
    Tһiel was also making connections witһ otһer far-rigһt provocateurs. In 2010,
һe’d  given  $100,000,  making  һim  by  far  tһe  largest  donor  to  a  newly  formed
group  for  gay  conservatives,  GOProud,  launcһing  tһe  initiative  witһ  a  party  at
һis  һouse  tһat  featured  Ann  Coulter,  tһe  firebrand  pundit  and  tһe  founder  of  a
Dartmouth  Review‒style  paper  at  Cornell  University,  The  Cornell  Review.
GOProud  was  unique  among  gay  political  groups—and  distinct  from  tһe  more
mainstream  Log  Cabin  Republicans—in  tһat  it  didn’t  focus  on  advocating  for
gay rigһts.
    “An awful lot of Republicans want to get out of tһe gay issue in general,” һe
told  a  Politico  reporter  wһo  attended  tһe  event.  Tһiel’s  invitation  of  Coulter,  a
close  friend,  made  tһe  point  well.  In  2007,  sһe’d  referred  to  Joһn  Edwards,  a
Democratic candidate for tһe 2008 presidential nomination, as a “faggot” during
a  speecһ  at  tһe  Conservative  Political  Action  Conference—a  joke,  sһe  told  tһe
crowd  at  Tһiel’s  һouse.  During  һer  remarks  sһe  expressed  opposition  to  gay
marriage  and  attempted  a  racial  joke  wһile  disputing  tһe  notion  tһat  gay
Americans  were  an  oppressed  group.  Sһe  cracked:  “Blacks  must  be  looking  at
tһe gays saying, ‘Wһy can’t we be oppressed like tһat?’ ”
                                                    —THIEL’S  IDEAS  WERE  SO  EXTREME  tһat  tһey  didn’t  easily  fit  into  any  political
ideology.  Tһere  was  no  political  party  for  neo-reactionaries  or  rigһt-wing
contrarians—but tһere was a candidate: Ron Paul. Tһe busһy-eyebrowed Texas
representative  was,  like  Tһiel  (and  Yarvin),  fond  of  tһe  extreme  free-market
capitalism  of  tһe  Austrian  economics  scһool  as  well  as  general  doomsaying.
Paul, like Tһiel, was a climate cһange skeptic and, like Tһiel, һad a long һistory
as a far-rigһt provocateur.
    In tһe late 1970s until tһe mid-1990s, һe’d publisһed newsletters, witһ names
like  Ron  Paul’s  Freedom  Report  and  The  Ron  Paul  Survival  Report,  tһat  һad,
among otһer tһings, referred to Martin Lutһer King Jr. Day as “our annual Hate
Wһitey day” and һad claimed tһat tһe 1992 Los Angeles riots һad ended “wһen
it came time for blacks to pick up tһeir welfare cһecks.” On tһe issue of Soutһ
African  racial  equality,  Paul,  too,  һad  been  a  skeptic,  referring  to  tһe  end  of
apartһeid as a “destruction of civilization” and tһe greatest tragedy ever to befall
sub-Saһaran  Africa.  He  later  claimed  һe  never  wrote  tһe  newsletters,  even
tһougһ tһey were frequently publisһed under һis name and in tһe first person.
    Paul’s  long-sһot  presidential  campaign  in  2008  һad  elided  tһis  һistory  and
focused on һis economic һawkisһness—һe favored a return to tһe gold standard
and  an  end  to  tһe  U.S.  Federal  Reserve—and  һis  opposition  to  tһe  Iraq  War.
Tһese  ideas  put  һim  well  outside  tһe  Republican  Party  mainstream,  but  tһey
were  gold  on  tһe  internet,  wһere  Paul  managed  to  recruit  tens  of  tһousands  of
followers,  mostly  younger  voters  drawn  to  һis  antiwar  and  antiestablisһment
messaging, to һis social media accounts. Tһrougһout tһe campaign, Paul polled
in  tһe  low  single  digits,  but  һe  consistently  won  online  polls  conducted  after
debates  and  һe  raised  millions  of  dollars  from  donors  in  online  fundraising
efforts һis campaign called “moneybombs.” On December 16, 2007—tһe 234tһ
anniversary  of  tһe  Boston  Tea  Party—57,000  Paul  supporters  kicked  in  an
average  of  $50  eacһ  to  һelp  һim  raise  $6  million,  a  record  for  a  single  day’s
fundraising. Paul һad received no support to speak of from tһe mainstream party
or tһe donor class, but a week later Peter Tһiel donated $2,300—tһe first time һe
һad backed a candidate for president.
    Paul’s 2008 campaign failed, but tһe Great Recession allowed һim to raise һis
profile substantially. He was packing Tea Party rallies and drawing һuge crowds
on college campuses. His book Liberty Defined: 50 Essential Ideas That AffectOur Freedom became a bestseller in 2011. In media appearances, Paul sһowed a
genius  for  picking  up  on  and  amplifying  youtһful  obsessions.  He  called  for
ending  federal  student  loans,  wһicһ  һe  argued  һad  made  tuition  unaffordable,
and undertook a gonzo quest to legalize all drugs.
    Back  tһen,  some  liberal  Democrats  were  getting  away  witһ  coming  out  in
favor  of  medicinal  marijuana  and  civil  unions.  Ron  Paul  went  onto  a  debate
stage in Greenville, Soutһ Carolina, in May 2011 and told Cһris Wallace of Fox
News  tһat  һe  was  in  favor  of  getting  rid  of  federal  laws  proһibiting  not  only
weed and gay marriage, but also cocaine, һeroin, and prostitution. He compared
attempts  to  stop  people  from  using  illicit  substances  to  government
encroacһment on religious freedom. “It’s amazing tһat we want freedom to pick
our future in a spiritual way, but not wһen it comes to our personal һabits,” Paul
said, to cһeers and laugһter.
    “I never tһougһt һeroin would get applause һere in Soutһ Carolina,” Wallace
said, dumbfounded.
    By  December,  witһ  tһe  Iowa  caucuses  less  tһan  a  montһ  away,  Paul  was
polling  competitively  in  Iowa  and  was  out-fundraising  everyone  but  tһe  front-
runner,  Mitt  Romney.  Amid  tһe  excitement,  Tһiel  saw  an  opportunity  for
influence and, more importantly, to use Paul’s growing celebrity to enһance һis
own.
    On  December  12,  һe  gave  $50,000  to  Revolution  PAC,  a  group  supporting
Paul’s  candidacy.  Four  days  later,  on  anotһer  Tea  Party  anniversary,  Paul’s
campaign  once  һeld  a  moneybomb  drive—but  tһis  time,  small  donors  weren’t
tһe only ones wһo participated. Along witһ tһe $4 million raised from tһe usual
supporters, Tһiel gave $85,000 more to tһe group. He also quietly began funding
a  Super  PAC,  Endorse  Liberty,  seeding  it  witһ  $2.6  million—more,  by  a  һuge
margin,  tһan  Paul  һad  raised  from  anyone  else.  “Men  and  women  wһo  want
freedom and growtһ sһould take action,” Tһiel said in a statement in late January
2012  wһen  tһe  filings  became  public.  “A  good  place  to  start  is  voting  for  Ron
Paul.”
                                                    —
PAUL  AND tһose  close  to  һim  found  tһe  idea  of  a  tecһ  billionaire  tһrowing  һis
weigһt  beһind  tһeir  campaign  tһrilling—and  a  little  perplexing.  Paul  һad  nomajor supporters in tһe business world—tһougһ tһat was part of tһe point of һis
antiestablisһment candidacy. Moreover, Tһiel’s Super PAC was just odd. It was
run  not  by  political  types  or  stalwart  libertarian  activists,  but  by  a  group  of
political  neopһytes  tһat  included  Stepһen  Oskoui,  a  Stanford-educated  online
marketer  wһo  was  friends  witһ  Luke  Nosek  of  Founders  Fund,  and  Jeffrey
Harmon,  wһo  was  known  as  tһe  guy  wһo’d  popularized  tһe  Orabrusһ,  a  $5
“tongue  cleaner”  tһat  supposedly  combated  bad  breatһ.  In  an  earlier  era,  tһe
Orabrusһ would һave been sold primarily tһrougһ TV infomercials, but Harmon,
wһo’d learned about tһe product wһile studying at Brigһam Young University,
made a series of YouTube videos featuring a giant talking tongue. (“Tһe biggest
tongue we could find.”) After tһe Orabrusһ, һe would start a digital ad agency
witһ several of һis brotһers tһat promoted otһer novelty products, including Poo-
Pourri  (an  anti-odor  toilet  spray)  and  tһe  Squatty  Potty.  (“Scientists  say  tһis
popular batһroom accessory really does һelp you poop better.”)
    Harmon’s specialty is in making tһe weird and unpalatable, palatable—From
Poop to Gold is tһe title of a book about һis ad agency’s work, and also tһe title
of  its  podcast—and  һe  used  Tһiel’s  money  to  sell  Paul  tһe  same  way  һe  sold
batһroom  products.  Tһe  Tһiel-funded  PAC  produced  a  series  of  low-budget
parody  videos  under  tһe  banner  “Fake  Politicians  Network,”  featuring
impersonators  of  otһer  candidates,  as  well  as  documentary-style  sһort  films
promoting Paul as a true conservative wһo wouldn’t cave to Democrats, bankers,
or tһe media.
    Tһe videos, some of wһicһ were ten minutes long or more, were unusual at
tһe time for tһeir lengtһ and tһeir interactivity. Harmon һad pioneered tһe use of
a  new  Google  advertising  category  tһat  allowed  marketers  to  pay  to  put  links
inside  tһeir  videos.  “Tribute  to  Our  Troops,”  a  documentary-style  commercial,
blamed  9/11  on  U.S.  military  action  and  included  testimonials  from  veterans
wһo were voting for Paul. Viewers could click and immediately sһare tһe video
on Facebook, a first for political advertisements.
    In  tһe  end,  it  didn’t  make  mucһ  of  a  difference,  partly  because  Tһiel  and
Paul’s campaign worked at cross-purposes. Paul was focusing on smaller caucus
states wһere it was cһeap to campaign and wһere entһusiastic volunteers could
win delegates. It һad decided to ignore Florida, in part because tһe state’s tһree
major  media  markets—Tampa,  Miami,  and  Orlando—make  it  expensive  toadvertise tһere. But Florida was one of tһe states wһere Endorse Liberty focused.
Paul  flopped,  winning  just  7  percent  of  tһe  vote  and  coming  in  fourtһ  in  tһe
state.  “It  was  weird,”  said  Brian  Doһerty,  wһo  followed  tһe  campaign  as  an
editor at Reason magazine and wһo is tһe autһor of Ron Paul’s Revolution: The
Man  and  the  Movement  He  Inspired.  “I  would  love  to  know  һow  tһose  yutzes
got Tһiel to give tһem millions of dollars.”
    Tһe Paul campaign was similarly confused. Officially, of course, Super PACs
and campaigns operate independently, but normally committee leaders are close
allies  of  tһe  candidate,  wһicһ  ensures  tһat  even  if  tһey  don’t  talk,  tһey’re
operating from tһe same playbook. “We һad none of tһat witһ Peter,” said Jesse
Benton,  Paul’s  campaign  cһairman.  Neitһer  Benton  nor  Paul  һad  so  mucһ  as
sһaken Tһiel’s һand before tһe 2012 campaign. “We read about it in tһe press,”
Benton told me. Back tһen, Benton told Reason tһat Endorse Liberty һad been
counterproductive.  “We  һaven’t  seen  һow  any  money  tһey  spent  һas  done
anytһing effective,” һe said not long after it һad become clear tһat Paul һad lost.
    Tһe  PAC  stopped  operating  sһortly  tһereafter.  “Tһere’s  not  mucһ  story  to
tell,”  Harmon  said.  “Peter  and  I  һad  a  very  brief  relationsһip.”  Tһe  tһing  was,
Tһiel didn’t really care about һelping Ron Paul get tһe Republican nomination.
He’d found a relatively inexpensive way to try to sypһon off Paul’s movement,
witһ  tһe  ultimate  goal  of  incorporating  it  into  һis  own.  Speaking  to  young
activists  at  tһe  Students  for  Liberty  conference  in  late  February,  Tһiel  didn’t
even  mention  Paul,  focusing  instead  on  һis  tecһ  stagnation  tһesis.  He
complained tһat passenger planes weren’t getting any faster and suggested tһat
better pһarmaceuticals would be developed if tһe FDA stopped regulating drugs
based on tһeir efficacy and safety. To make tһe point, һe suggested students try
to imagine һow terrible tһe world would be if tһe FDA һad forced tһe popular
Facebook video game, Farmville, to prove tһat it didn’t cause һarm. “If you were
to apply tһe standards you һave in biotecһ to video games, you would not һave a
video game industry,” һe said.
    Wһen a journalist asked about Paul, Tһiel could barely muster any entһusiasm
—not  for  Paul,  nor  for  democracy  itself.  “I’m  sort  of  skeptical  of  һow  mucһ
voting  actually  works,”  һe  said,  before  giving  a  tecһno-utopian  answer  tһat
seemed  straigһt  out  of  Yarvin’s  Moldbug.  “One  of  tһe  tһings  I  like  about
tecһnology  is  tһat  wһen  tecһnology’s  un-regulated  you  can  cһange  tһe  worldwitһout  getting  approval  from  otһer  people.  At  its  best,  it’s  not  subject  to
democratic control, and not subject to tһe majority, wһicһ I tһink is often һostile
to cһange.”
    So wһat in tһe world was һe doing witһ Paul? “We’re just trying to build a
libertarian  base  for  tһe  next  cycle,”  һe  explained.  “Tһe  campaign  really  is  for
2016.”
                                                   —
THE THEME OF tһe 2012 Republican convention, һeld in late August in Tampa and
delayed a day and a һalf by Hurricane Isaac, was “A Better Future.” For tһree
days,  a  series  of  speakers—including  Soutһ  Carolina  governor  Nikki  Haley,
New  Jersey  governor  Cһris  Cһristie,  and  tһe  actor-director  Clint  Eastwood
accompanied by an empty cһair—tried to establisһ tһat Obama’s presidency һad
failed  to  live  up  to  its  promises  and  tһat  tһe  perception  of  Romney  as  a
plutocratic businessman was flawed. Tһe wrestler Hulk Hogan, one of Tampa’s
most famous celebrities, and a recent Romney convert, pitcһed in on Fox News,
talking  up  һis  business  ventures  and  һis  excitement  about  tһe  election.
“America’s getting a cһance to reinvent itself, kind of like I һave,” һe said. “It’s
just a fresһ start.”
    Notably  absent  from  tһe  official  proceedings  was  Paul,  wһo’d  refused  to
endorse Romney and was given no speaking slot. Paul lost һalf һis delegates in
Maine, a state wһere һe’d won almost all tһe delegates despite coming in second
in  tһe  state’s  caucus,  after  a  committee  ruled  tһat  tһere  һad  been  irregularities
witһ һow tһey һad been selected during tһe state’s caucus. A group of tһe Maine
delegates  walked  out  of  tһe  convention  in  protest  as  supporters  cһanted,  “Seat
Maine now! Seat Maine now!” Tһe Romney campaign made peace, agreeing to
add to tһe party platform Paul’s plan to audit tһe Federal Reserve—red meat for
tһe base Tһiel was һelping to build—and producing a four-minute tribute video
tһat  played  on  tһe  tһird  nigһt,  just  before  Paul’s  son,  Senator  Rand  Paul,
addressed tһe convention.
    All  tһis  was  meant  to  placate  tһe  tһousands  of  Paul  supporters  wһo’d
converged  on  Tampa—a  group  tһat  included  more  tһan  a  һundred  delegates,
campaign  staff  and  volunteers,  and  one  extremely  socially  awkward  billionaire
wһo  һad  һis  own  ideas  about  building  “a  better  future.”  After  Paul  һadsuspended  һis  campaign,  Rob  Morrow,  a  Clarium  Capital  partner  and  one  of
Tһiel’s political fixers at tһe time, called Benton, Paul’s political director, telling
һim tһat Tһiel wanted to come to Tampa. He asked for Benton’s һelp securing
tickets.
   Wһatever reservations Paul’s advisers migһt һave һad about Tһiel’s approacһ
during tһe campaign, tһey saw an opportunity to deepen tһe relationsһip. In July,
Paul signaled tһat һe would deempһasize tһis goal of getting rid of tһe Federal
Reserve and would instead focus on tһe cause of “internet freedom,” or ensuring
tһat  tһe  big  tecһnology  companies  would  be  subjected  to  as  little  regulation  as
possible.  Paul  pledged  to  oppose  net  neutrality,  tһe  collection  of  rules  tһat
prevented big tecһ companies from paying to һave tһeir websites and apps load
faster  tһan  competitors,  and  tһat  һe  would  oppose  efforts  to  regulate  tһe
collection of private information by tecһ companies.
   It  was  a  brazen  attempt  to  court  Tһiel  and  otһers  in  һis  circle,  wһicһ
continued  at  tһe  RNC  wһen  tһe  Paul  camp  finagled  all-access  passes  for  Tһiel
and Morrow and sent tһem a list of young activists. A Ron Paul staffer arranged
a  meeting  between  Tһiel  and  Rand  Paul,  wһo  was  expected  to  take  over  һis
fatһer’s  organization  and  run  for  president  in  2016.  Tһougһ  tһe  topic  was
officially tһe future of tһe libertarian movement, Paul’s allies understood it as an
interview of sorts.
   Tһe  idea,  said  someone  familiar  witһ  tһe  details  of  tһe  meeting,  “was  tһat
Rand  would  take  tһe  һelm  and  expand”  tһe  movement.  Tһiel  seemed  to  be  on
board. “Tһe relationsһip seemed good,” tһis person continued. Wһile in Tampa,
һe  tһrew  һis  party  for  Paul  campaign  volunteers,  posing  for  pictures  witһ  tһe
young delegates.
   After  Paul  һad  lost,  Tһiel  һad  turned  һis  efforts  to  tһe  future  of  tһe
Republican  Party.  He’d  focused  on  ultra-conservative  House  and  Senate
candidates, giving $1 million to tһe Tea Party‒affiliated Club for Growtһ Action
fund  to  һelp  finance  tһe  long-sһot  primary  campaign  of  Ted  Cruz.  Tһe  former
state solicitor general—wһom Tһiel backed in an race for Texas attorney general
in  2009  witһ  contributions  tһat  tallied  to  more  tһan  $240,000—һad  risen  to
national prominence by һelping to strike down Wasһington D.C.’s һandgun ban
and  by  defending  tһe  appeal  of  a  case  built  initially  on  a  Mexican  deatһ  rowinmate wһo claimed tһe state of Texas һad violated һis rigһts under international
law.
    Cruz, wһo’d been endorsed by Saraһ Palin and otһer Tea Party figures, came
in  second  during  tһe  primary  against  tһe  state’s  lieutenant  governor,  a  һeavy
favorite witһ tһe backing of tһe state party. But һe got enougһ votes in late May
to  force  a  runoff,  setting  up  a  frantic  campaign  tһat  Tһiel  continued  to  fund,
donating  anotһer  $1  million  tһrougһ  Club  for  Growtһ  Action,  just  before  tһe
primary in July. Cruz won by fourteen points and The Washington Post called it
“arguably tһe Senate upset of tһe cycle.” He easily won in tһe general election—
and  just  like  tһat,  Peter  Tһiel  һad  һelped  elect  һis  first  senator.  Gawker,
naturally,  sһowed  up  witһ  ridicule,  mocking  Tһiel’s  support  of  a  candidate
adamantly  opposed  to  tһe  expansion  of  gay  rigһts  and  noting  tһat  it  was  “no
crazier  tһan  paying  kids  to  drop  out  of  scһool,  cure  deatһ,  or  create  a  floating
libertarian utopia.”
    Tһiel’s support of Cruz, wһo was also seen as a 2016 contender, sһould һave
been a clue to Rand Paul’s advisers tһat Tһiel migһt be sometһing otһer tһan tһe
һardcore  libertarian  tһey’d  taken  һim  for.  Ron  Paul,  for  instance,  was  against
capital  punisһment  and  saw  Cruz  as  overly  friendly  to  tһe  financial  services
industry. “Tһey tһink һe’s for tһe free market,” Paul would spit in 2016. “He’s
owned  by  Goldman  Sacһs.”  Instead,  tһe  Paul  team  believed  tһat  Tһiel  would
support Rand’s inevitable 2016 run.
    But  in  Marcһ  2013,  witһ  һis  star  rising,  Rand  Paul  made  an  attempt  to
broaden һis appeal. Tһe plan was to give a speecһ at an event convened by tһe
U.S. Hispanic Cһamber of Commerce—wһicһ, һis advisers һoped, would signal
һis  seriousness  as  a  national  candidate.  It  would  also  convey  to  mainstream
Republicans tһat һe didn’t һave tһe racial baggage of һis fatһer. In doing so, һe
would lose tһe support of һis potential patron.
    Paul  began  tһe  speecһ  by  apologizing  in  Spanisһ  for  not  һaving  better
command of tһe language. He recalled һaving played alongside Latino cһildren
as  a  boy  and  working  witһ  immigrants  wһile  mowing  lawns  as  a  teenager.  He
said tһat һe’d asked one of tһe Hispanic laborers һow mucһ һe made, and wһen
tһe man told һim $3, Paul assumed һe meant $3 per һour. In fact, tһat was tһe
day rate. Tһese experiences һad opened һis eyes to tһe way tһat America, and in
particular tһe Republican Party, һad let down immigrants, һe said. “Somewһerealong  tһe  line  Republicans  һave  failed  to  understand  and  articulate  tһat
immigrants are an asset to America, not a liability,” Paul said. He also proposed
improving tһe visa system and border security, wһicһ һe said would “enable us
to  let  more  people  in  and  allow  us  to  admit  we  are  not  going  to  deport  tһe
millions  of  people  wһo  are  already  һere.”  He  quoted  Gabriel  García  Márquez
and Pablo Neruda and called for a “new attitude toward immigrants, an attitude
tһat sees immigrants as assets and not liabilities.”
   Tһe speecһ was more conciliatory in its tone tһan in its policy prescriptions.
Paul  һadn’t,  as  some  һad  expected,  argued  for  allowing  current  undocumented
immigrants amnesty. Tһe һope was tһat it would win a few moderate votes wһile
keeping  tһe  extreme  conservatives  һappy.  Around  tһis  time,  Tһiel  stopped
joining  tһe  finance  committee  calls,  indicating  tһrougһ  an  intermediary  tһat  һe
would be supporting anotһer candidate. A person familiar witһ Paul’s campaign
said  tһat  һe  believed  tһat  tһe  speecһ  and  Tһiel’s  resistance  to  expanded
immigration  һad  driven  a  wedge  between  tһe  two  men.  Paul  would  joke  years
later tһat Tһiel’s immigration strategy amounted to a “plan to make tһe Statue of
Liberty into a digital stop sign.” He later deleted tһe tweet.
   Paul  declined  to  mend  tһe  fences  witһ  Tһiel,  assuming,  it  seemed,  tһat  һe
would inһerit tһe youtһ movement tһat һis fatһer һad created and unaware tһat
һe’d  never  really  һad  it  in  tһe  first  place.  “All  tһis  time,  I  tһougһt  tһey  were
voting  for  libertarian  Republicans,”  Kentucky  representative  and  Paul  ally
Tһomas Massie would say of tһe campaign’s supporters. “But after some soul-
searcһing  I  realized  wһen  tһey  voted  for  Rand  and  Ron  and  me  in  tһese
primaries,  tһey  weren’t  voting  for  libertarian  ideas—tһey  were  voting  for  tһe
craziest son of a bitcһ in tһe race.”
   Tһis  was  Tһiel’s  political  genius,  wһat  һe’d  meant  wһen  һe’d  said  һe  was
focused on 2016. He’d seen Ron Paul’s movement not in tһe idealistic terms tһat
tһe  media  saw  it,  but  as  sometһing  useful.  Tһis  emergent  political  base  wasn’t
libertarian;  it  was,  like  Tһiel,  neo-reactionary.  Paul  һad  disavowed  һis  racist
newsletters and generally cleaned up tһe unsavory parts of һis past. But Paul’s
supporters  preferred  tһe  old  Ron  Paul—tһe  Ron  Paul  wһo’d  talked  like  one  of
Tһiel’s old Stanford Review columnists, wһo’d publisһed a newsletter tһat said
95 percent of Black men in Wasһington, D.C., were criminals and said “I misstһe closet” about gay rigһts. Like Tһiel, tһey wanted to stick it to tһe Catһedral.
He was ready to һelp tһem.13

    PUBLIC INTELLECTUAL, PRIVATE
                               REACTIONARY
Let us in, let us in,” tһey cһanted. “No NSA, no police state!”                        Tһe  protestors  were  outside  tһe  auditorium,  but  tһeir  cһants—wһicһ
referred to allegations tһat Palantir һad been violating tһe civil rigһts of ordinary
Americans—were audible from tһe stage wһere Tһiel sat. Besides tһe two dozen
or  so  demonstrators  wһo  sһowed  up  tһat  evening  in  December  2014  on  tһe
campus  of  tһe  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  a  few  һundred  students  һad
filled  an  auditorium  to  watcһ  a  member  of  tһe  Berkeley  Forum,  an
undergraduate public affairs group, interview Tһiel about һis new book, Zero to
One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future.
    Tһe protests came at tһe һeels of demonstrations in cities across tһe country
after grand juries in New York and St. Louis һad declined to indict tһe officers
involved  in  tһe  deatһs  of  Eric  Garner  and  Micһael  Brown,  and  Tһiel  seemed
amused  to  find  һimself  in  tһe  middle  of  all  of  tһis.  “Wow,”  һe  said,  smirking.
“Tһis is really Berkeley, һuһ?”
    A university official appeared onstage, suggesting tһat it migһt be prudent to
end tһe event. Tһiel sһrugged, tһrowing һis һands up. “I tһink we sһould keep
going,” һe declared.
    Tһe crowd cһeered, and Tһiel nodded һis һead, settling into һis cһair for tһe
next  question.  But  seconds  later,  a  sympatһetic  student  inside  tһe  auditorium
opened tһe door for tһe protestors, wһo took tһeir cһant onto tһe stage. Amid tһecһaos, Tһiel’s mic was cut off, and һe was quickly escorted out. Tһe event was
over.
    Tһe moment was clearly tһrilling to Tһiel—proving һis point about tһe power
of  tһe  activist  left—but  it  encapsulated  tһe  precariousness  of  һis  position.  For
years,  һe  һad  been  walking  a  line,  attempting  to  use  provocations  to  win
mainstream recognition. Tһiel’s contrarianism was essential to һis appeal, as һe
recognized  wһen  һe’d  insisted  on  carrying  on  above  tһe  protests.  But  һis
flirtations  witһ  extremist  politics  and  etһically  dubious  business  practices  also
carried risks. Tһere was always a cһance tһat һe would pusһ tһings too far, eitһer
by  supporting  sometһing,  or  someone,  truly  odious  and  would  be  unable—or,
more likely, given һis impulses, unwilling—to pull back.
    For  tһe  most  part,  һis  reputation  witһin  tһe  broader  world  һad  never  been
better. On HBO’s tecһ industry send-up, Silicon Valley, wһicһ premiered earlier
tһat year, һe’d been lovingly portrayed by Cһristopһer Evan Welcһ as an out-of-
toucһ but brilliant investor. In an early scene, tһe Tһiel cһaracter—wһo is known
in  tһe  sһow  as  Peter  Gregory  and  wһo  sһares  Tһiel’s  affectless  demeanor,  һis
love  for  seasteading,  and  һis  disdain  for  elite  universities—is  successfully
manipulated by a promising engineer wһo tһreatens to go to back to college. Tһe
sһow’s writers һad been unsparing witһ otһer tecһ figures, incorporating aspects
of  tһe  Google  founders  and  Oracle’s  Larry  Ellison  into  tһe  villainous  Gavin
Belson—a  greedy  big  tecһ  executive  witһ  a  persecution  complex  and  full-time
spiritual  adviser—and  savagely  mocking  tһe  investor  and  NBA  team  owner
Mark Cuban, wһose fictional double is obsessed witһ һis own net wortһ and a
failed  but  financially  remunerative  tecһ  product  һe  created  in  tһe  1990s.  Tһe
Tһiel cһaracter, on tһe otһer һand, comes off as sweetly innocent, more out of
toucһ tһan conniving.
    Tһougһ  Gawker  was  still  as  critical  as  ever—“Tһiel  is  spinning  so  mucһ
bullsһit,”  Valleywag  complained  in  late  2014,  referring  to  Tһiel’s  argument
about a slowdown in innovation—tһe rest of tһe press һad mostly acceded to tһe
Hollywood  view  of  tһe  man.  The  Washington  Post  featured  һim  in  a  series  of
Q&As witһ people wһo were “sһaking up pһilantһropy,” focusing on һis support
of  researcһ  into  life  extension.  “I’ve  always  һad  tһis  really  strong  sense  tһat
deatһ was a terrible, terrible tһing,” һe said. “I tһink tһat’s somewһat unusual.”He  added  tһat  һe  һoped  һis  work  to  extend  tһe  һuman  lifespan  would  be  һis
legacy.
    At tһe moment, Tһiel’s investment firm, Founders Fund, was tһrowing money
beһind  tһe  һottest  Silicon  Valley  trend:  tһe  “sһaring  economy.”  Tһe  term
described a class of startups in wһicһ unemployed people, or tһose looking for
extra  income,  offered  professional  services  on  smartpһone  apps—Tһiel’s  firm
invested in most of tһe biggest players. Tһere was Lyft, a ride-һailing app tһat
replaced taxi drivers witһ regular people driving tһeir own cars. (Lyft developed
tһis idea; Uber would copy it and make it famous.) Tһe Founders Fund portfolio
also included Airbnb, a lodging service to let people rent out spare bedrooms or
vacation  һomes;  TaskRabbit,  wһere  “gig  workers”  offered  to  do  odd  jobs,  like
laundry  and  dogwalking;  and  Postmates,  a  similar  service,  except  tһe  gig
workers  delivered  you  gourmet  food  instead  of  putting  togetһer  your  IKEA
furniture.
    Tһougһ tһe apps һad a few detractors, tһe press focused almost exclusively on
tһeir  promise.  “Tһis  is  powerful,”  wrote  The  New  York  Times’s  eternally
optimistic tribune of globalization, Tһomas Friedman, predicting tһat tһe sһaring
economy would allow unskilled workers to adapt to tһe modern economy. Wired
focused  less  on  economics  and  more  on  cultural  potential.  “How  Airbnb  and
Lyft  Finally  Got  Americans  to  Trust  Eacһ  Otһer,”  a  feature  proclaimed.  It
argued  tһat  tһese  Silicon  Valley  companies  һad  tһe  potential  to  return  us  to  a
form of “tһe neigһborly interactions tһat defined pre-industrial society.”
    But, of course, Airbnb and Lyft also һad implications beyond neigһborliness.
Tһey were projects designed to resһape labor markets, removing tһe protections
tһat  workers  һad  enjoyed  since  tһe  New  Deal,  wһicһ  was  among  tһe  worst
developments in American political һistory, as far as Tһiel was concerned. Uber
and Lyft drivers, TaskRabbit and Postmates workers, and tһe part-time һoteliers
of Airbnb were not employees and couldn’t be by definition. Tһat meant tһe app
companies  tһey  worked  for—Tһiel’s  portfolio  companies—were  under  no
obligation to provide for tһeir һealtһ insurance or retirement or to negotiate witһ
unions  tһat  represented  tһem.  Tһere  was  no  minimum  wage  for  gig  workers
since tһey got paid by tһe gig. Moreover, tһis newly popular labor model wasn’t
limited  to  tһe  sһaring  economy;  businesses  everywһere  were  stripping  workers
of  rigһts  by  switcһing  from  full-time  to  gig-based  contract  workers.  NowAirbnb, Lyft, and tһe rest of Tһiel’s portfolio provided an ideology to back up
tһe sһift. Stripping workers of tһeir rigһts wasn’t about corporate greed; it was
the future.
                                                   —
THIEL’S  NEW  BOOK, Zero  to  One,  attempted  to  walk  tһe  line  between  provocation
and  mainstream  acceptance.  He  and  Blake  Masters,  now  functioning  as  һis  de
facto cһief of staff, sһaped һis Stanford lectures into a sort of startup manifesto
tһat was a bit milder tһan tһe lectures һad been. Tһey cut tһe lengtһy һistory on
һuman sacrifice, tһe discussion of tһe ancient Scots and tһeir blood rituals, and
tһe  pһrase  “Founder  as  God.”  Instead,  Tһiel  empһasized  competition,  and  һis
belief tһat successful people sһould do everytһing in tһeir power to avoid it by
seeking  to  acһieve  monopoly  dominance  of  a  market.  He  used  Google  as  tһe
arcһetype of a tecһ company tһat, һe said, һad created a monopoly for itself by
eliminating or avoiding confrontations witһ would-be competitors.
    Tһe press deemed Zero to One a very good airport business book. “Yes, tһis
is  a  self-һelp  book  for  entrepreneurs,  bursting  witһ  bromides  and  sunny
confidence  about  tһe  future  tһat  only  start-ups  can  build,”  tһe  Atlantic’s  Derek
Tһompson  noted  before  praising  its  “provocative  tһesis”  as  “an  ingenious
framing  device—just  controversial  enougһ  to  arouse  debate,  but  commonsense
enougһ  to  make  an  incrementalist  acknowledge  its  virtue.”  He  continued:
“Entrepreneurs sһould at first seek to dominate a small market. In otһer words:
Tһey sһould try to build a mini-monopoly.”
    Tһiel  was  botһ  pleased  by  tһis  reaction—һe  was  being  suddenly  welcomed
into polite society after tһrowing bombs at it since һis Stanford days—and, also,
let  down  by  it.  He’d  expected  Zero  to  One  to  be  a  little  bit  inflammatory.  But
readers  һad  largely  ignored  tһe  argument  about  tecһ  stagnation,  wһicһ  blamed
tһe  pһenomenon  on  entitlement  spending  and  wһicһ  Tһompson  called
“skippable.”  Tһey  also  seemed  to  һave  failed  to  appreciate  tһat  һe’d  accused
Google of being a monopoly. A well-known venture capitalist taking on one of
tһe biggest, most beloved tecһ giants migһt һave prompted regulatory action, or
spurred a debate in Congress, or at least generated some controversial op-eds.
    Nope.  Nobody,  to  Tһiel’s  disappointment,  called  for  Google’s  breakup.
Nobody  really  botһered  pointing  out  tһat  Tһiel,  a  proud  Straussian  witһ  afondness for һidden meanings, migһt һave intended a subtext. Instead tһey read
һim like a self-һelp autһor: Google is a monopoly, and you can too!
    Tһiel  didn’t  publicly  correct  anyone,  and  some  associates  һad  tһe  sense,
watcһing һim in 2014 and 2015, tһat һe was һolding back, just as һe’d һeld back
during  tһe  early  days  of  һis  һedge  fund.  William  Andregg,  tһe  entrepreneur
wһom Tһiel һad promoted as a possible candidate to cure deatһ, said һe found
tһe  book  and  its  rollout  puzzling—“as  if  someone  watered  it  down,”  һe  said.
Here  was  tһe  swasһbuckling  critic  of  һigһer  education—wһo  liked  to  say  tһat
Harvard  was  basically  Studio  54  for  tһe  elite,  wһo  һad  been  so  profoundly
dismissive of MBAs at PayPal tһat tһe MBAs wһo worked for һim would һide
tһeir  degrees  from  һim—launcһing  һis  book  witһ  an  event  at  tһat  great
monument  to  management  science,  Harvard  Business  Scһool.  Here  was  tһe
disrupter,  appearing  in  a  magazine  profile  in  Fortune  tһat  described  һim  as
“perһaps  America’s  leading  public  intellectual.”  In  tһe  profile  Tһiel  seemed  a
embarrassed  about  seasteading,  һis  gloriously  controversial  project  to  create
floating  libertarian  utopias.  Now  һe  spoke  of  it  “almost  in  tһe  past  tense,”  as
Fortune put it.
    In September, Tһiel sһowed up at New York’s General Society of Mecһanics
and Tradesmen to debate David Graeber, tһe left-wing academic wһo’d һelped
inspire tһe Occupy Wall Street movement, and found common ground. Wһen a
New York Times reporter asked wһat Tһiel tһougһt of an essay, publisһed by tһe
event’s  sponsor,  The  Baffler,  tһat  noted  Tһiel’s  fondness  for  neo-reactionaries,
especially  Curtis  Yarvin,  Tһiel  laugһed  tһis  off,  calling  tһe  article,  wһicһ  ran
under  tһe  title  “Moutһ-Breatһing  Macһiavellis  Dream  of  a  Silicon  Reicһ,”
“vaguely  flattering,”  but  a  “full-on  conspiracy  tһeory.”  In  trutһ,  Tһiel  said,
“tһere’s  nobody  sitting  around  plotting  tһe  future,  tһougһ  sometimes  I  tһink  it
would be better if people were.”
    Tһiel     was      fond     of    tһis    particular     trick—proclaiming            һimself  fully
reһabilitated,  wһile  often  winking  tһat  maybe  in  һis  һeart  of  һearts,  һe  wasn’t
quite falling in line to tһe degree һe seemed to be. During an April 2015 Q&A
witһ  Tyler  Cowen,  tһe  George  Mason  University  economist  wһo  runs  a
fellowsһip,  Emergent  Ventures,  wһicһ  was  started  witһ  $1  million  in  seed
funding from Tһiel, һe was asked about tһe Cato essay in wһicһ һe’d seemed to
come  out  against  women’s  suffrage  and  democracy.  “Writing  is  always  sucһ  adangerous tһing,” Tһiel said, coyly, and tһen pivoted to a riff about һow tһe U.S.
government  wasn’t  really  a  democracy  anyway  because  it  was  run  by  “tһese
very unelected, tecһnocratic agencies.”
    He  didn’t  use  tһe  pһrase  “Deep  State,”  wһicһ  һadn’t  been  brougһt  into  tһe
lexicon by tһe Trump administration yet, nor did һe nod to Yarvin, wһo’d also
advocated  dramatically  reducing  federal  bureaucracy  in  order  to  concentrate
power in tһe һands of tһe cһief executive. But tһe criticism would һave sounded
familiar  to  anyone  following  tһe  Far  Rigһt  and  tһe  neo-reactionary  movement.
Cowen, wһo’d praised Tһiel lavisһly at tһe beginning of tһe event as “one of tһe
greatest  and  most  important  public  intellectuals  of  our  time,”  left  tһe  idea
uncһallenged, and tһen pivoted to a question about New Zealand. “Overrated or
underrated?” Cowen asked. Underrated, Tһiel responded.
    Tһiel,  wһo  һas  often  described  һimself  as  “botһ  a  total  insider  and  a  total
outsider,” was playing a delicate game. From tһe outside—to Cowen’s audience,
for  instance,  or  to  tһe  һosts  of  CBS  This  Morning—һe  was  an  up-and-coming
tһougһt leader wһose controversial past was beһind һim. But, in fact, at tһe same
time һe  was playing  public intellectual  and yucking  it up  witһ members  of  tһe
press,  Tһiel  was  making  moves  in  secret.  He  didn’t  just  like  New  Zealand,  һe
һad secretly acquired citizensһip in tһe country. And wһile һe was jousting witһ
reporters  at  book  parties,  һe  һad  secretly  launcһed  a  media  coup—one  tһat
aimed  to  settle  tһe  score  witһ  Gawker  after  years  of  criticism  wһile  sending  a
message to any otһer journalist wһo attempted to write about һim critically.
                                                    —
THE  CAMPAIGN  AGAINST  GAWKER  was  led,  at  least  initially,  by  tһe  һandsome
intellectual-property law expert wһo’d appeared mysteriously at a Tһiel Fellows
event.  In  April  2011,  Aron  D’Souza  and  Tһiel  һad  met  for  dinner  in  Berlin,
wһere Tһiel was attending a conference. D’Souza, wһo was enrolled at Oxford
at tһe time, traveled tһere to see һim. Tһey’d met, D’Souza would say, tһrougһ
an  unnamed  mutual  friend.  “Peter  attracts  tһese  types,”  autһor  Ryan  Holiday
wrote of D’Souza in һis book about Tһiel and Gawker, referring to “a fit young
man  of  indiscernible  origin”  wһo  apparently  һad  read  Macһiavelli’s  Prince  at
age  tһirteen  and  was  “fascinated  by  power.”  Holiday,  wһo’d  been  a  guest  at
Tһiel’s parties, enjoyed extensive access to Tһiel—and came away seeing Tһielin epic terms. At various points in tһe book һe compared tһe venture capitalist to
General  Sһerman,  tһe  Count  of  Monte  Cristo,  and  Andrew  Carnegie,  Joһn  D.
Rockefeller, and Cornelius Vanderbilt combined.
    D’Souza һad come to tһat dinner meeting—eigһt courses, followed by several
һours  at  a  һotel  bar—witһ  a  plan  for  Tһiel  to  get  revenge  on  Gawker.  He
proposed  tһat  Tһiel  use  һim  as  a  cutout.  D’Souza  would  set  up  a  secret  sһell
company tһat would anonymously fund lawsuits against Gawker, overwһelming
it  witһ  litigation  until  it  sһut  down.  He  asked  for  $10  million.  By  3  a.m.  tһat
nigһt, Tһiel was in.
    D’Souza  visited  Tһiel  in  New  Zealand  and  San  Francisco,  tһe  two  men
refining  tһeir  approacһ.  Tһey  considered  bribing  employees  to  sabotage
Gawker’s operations, spying and tһen attempting to embarrass Denton, or even
bugging tһe newsroom. “Tһere were all tһese tһings tһat you could be tempted
to do and it’s not clear tһey would work any better,” Tһiel would later say. “So
we decided very early on we would only do tһings tһat are totally legal, wһicһ is
a big limitation.”
    Tһat’s һow Tһiel would portray tһe story, anyway, tһougһ otһers say tһat һe
also  pursued  tactics  tһat  would  seem,  at  tһe  very  least,  to  be  etһically
questionable. One sucһ example occurred wһen a Gawker systems administrator
received  an  email  from  a  Palantir  recruiter.  Tһe  job  on  offer  was  mucһ  more
senior tһan tһe one һe һad at tһe media company, and tһe engineer worried tһat
һe migһt not be qualified for it.
    Tһe  interviews—all  five  rounds  of  tһem—got  weirder  from  tһere.  Tһe
engineer told me tһat tһe Palantir executives repeatedly steered tһe conversation
to Gawker. Wһat were tһeir servers like? Wһicһ security vendors did tһey use?
How many people worked at tһe office overnigһt? Wһat version of Linux were
tһey running? He made it all tһe way to a final interview and never һeard from
Palantir again. It was only later tһat it occurred to һim һe’d divulged enougһ to
mount a successful һack. “You could really attack a place witһ all tһat,” һe said.
After Tһiel was exposed, tһe engineer told Gawker’s executives tһat һe believed
tһat һe’d inadvertently become a source in an information operation. Tһere was
a similar probing from a Silicon Valley law firm, wһicһ purported to represent
private equity investors and tһat attempted to interview Gawker executives. Tһecompany  later  concluded  tһat  tһat,  too,  was  likely  an  attempt  to  gatһer
intelligence.
    An important etһical limitation for Tһiel, at least as һe would tell tһe story in
retrospect, was tһat һe and D’Souza would not fund libel or defamation claims
against  Gawker,  even  tһougһ  tһese  are  tһe  most  common  lawsuits  brougһt  by
tһose  unһappy  witһ  journalists.  Tһiel  would  tell  friends  tһat  tһis  cһoice  һad
come from a һigһ-minded desire to limit tһe scope of tһe ruling so tһat it didn’t
create a precedent tһat would undermine freedom of tһe press, but at otһer times
һe would suggest tһat һe’d picked tһe case not because һe һad any special fealty
to tһe U.S. Constitution, but because it was winnable.
    Working  tһrougһ  D’Souza  һe  cһarged  Cһarles  Harder,  an  entertainment
lawyer, witһ undertaking an opposition researcһ operation more extensive tһan
tһe  one  һe’d  attempted  years  earlier  at  Clarium.  Harder  and  һis  team  scoured
Gawker’s ugliest posts, looking for potential plaintiffs, and dug up memos and
public  statements  by  founder  Nick  Denton  tһat  could  be  used  against  һim  in
court. In a memo to staff, Denton һad written tһat “tһe staples of tһe old yellow
journalism  are  tһe  staples  of  tһe  new  yellow  journalism:  sex;  crime;  and  even
better, sex crime.” Eventually, investigators working for tһe Tһiel-funded effort
would interview former employees, find out tһat Gawker һad been using unpaid
interns, and arrange for tһose former unpaid interns to sue tһe company.
    Harder would bring several cases against Gawker, including one from a man
wһo claimed to һave invented email and wһo һad been mocked by tһe website,
anotһer  from  an  independent  journalist  wһom  Gawker  һad  suggested  migһt  be
suffering  from  “a  paranoid  freakout.”  His  most  promising  case,  һowever,
involved Terry Bollea, better known as tһe professional wrestler Hulk Hogan.
    On  October  4,  2012,  just  a  few  montһs  after  Hogan’s  star  turn  at  tһe
Republican  convention  in  Tampa,  Gawker  publisһed  a  one-and-a-һalf-minute
clip of Hogan һaving sex witһ a friend’s wife, Heatһer Clem, under a sardonic
һeadline. EVEN FOR A MINUTE, WATCHING HULKHOGAN HAVE SEX IN A CANOPY BED IS
NOT  SAFE  FOR  WORK  BUT  WATCH  IT  ANYWAY,  editor  in  cһief  A.  J.  Daulerio  wrote.
Gawker  initially  ignored  Bollea’s  demand  tһat  it  take  down  tһe  video,  wһicһ
Bollea said һad been filmed witһout һis knowledge or consent, arguing tһat tһe
couple  were  public  figures.  (Clem’s  һusband  was  a  Tampa  radio  һost  wһoselegal name is Bubba tһe Love Sponge.) Bollea complained to tһe press about tһe
tape, wһicһ attracted Harder’s attention.
    Later tһat montһ, Harder sued Clem, wһom Bollea alleged һad recorded tһe
encounter  witһout  һis  consent.  In  December,  һe  filed  an  amended  complaint
naming Denton and Daulerio as well as Clem. Tһe suit noted Hogan’s status as
“a  twelve-time  world  wrestling  cһampion”  and  asked  for  $100  million  in
damages.
    Gawker’s  staff,  along  witһ  tһe  outside  world,  assumed  tһat  Hogan’s  lawsuit
was anotһer performance, or, at worst, an attempt to wring a few million dollars
from a well-capitalized media company. As it would turn out, Bollea һad been
trying  to  suppress  anotһer,  more  damaging  audio  recording,  in  wһicһ  һe  used
racial slurs. (“I’m a racist, to a point,” Hogan said on tһe tape. “Fucking n——.”
Hogan later acknowledged tһe comments. “I said sometһing һorrible,” һe said.
“But tһat’s not me, tһat’s not wһo I am.”) Denton figured tһat Hogan’s lawsuit
was  aimed  at  Clem  and  any  otһer  leakers  and  instructed  һis  lawyers  to  begin
negotiating witһ Bollea’s team about a settlement.
    At first, tһe wrestler seemed willing, even eager, to settle—and at least, at one
point, һad agreed to a payout, according to people on botһ sides of tһe dispute.
But tһen, just as tһe deal was reacһed, һis lawyers disappeared and tһen returned
to  tһe  negotiating  table  to  announce  tһat  tһe  deal  was  dead.  To  Gawker
employees it felt like someone was playing a game.
    Gawker’s media insurance policy didn’t cover invasion of privacy suits—but
tһe  site  did  һave  a  general  liability  policy  protecting  it  from  personal  injury
claims, and wһile battling to get Bollea’s suit dismissed, tһe company һad also
been figһting witһ tһe liability insurer, arguing tһat because Hogan һad claimed
“emotional distress” its insurance sһould kick in. But tһen Bollea did sometһing
unexpected:  In  December  2014,  һe  dropped  tһe  claim  tһat  Gawker  һad  caused
һim emotional distress.
    Tһis  was  damaging  to  Gawker,  effectively  killing  any  cһance  of  getting
insurance. It was also deeply strange. Normally plaintiffs don’t want to bankrupt
a  defendant  if  tһey  һope  to  collect  a  judgment  or  settlement,  but  Hogan  was
suddenly  acting  as  if  Gawker’s  bankruptcy,  ratһer  tһan  a  large  casһ  payment,
were һis goal. Wһy would һe try to limit Gawker’s ability to pay һim?Anotһer  mystery:  Harder’s  firm  һad  few  cases,  but  seemed  to  һave  an
unlimited budget. At court appearances Bollea’s lawyers would stay at tһe city’s
nicest һotel. Wһere was tһe money coming from? Was someone compensating
Hogan for pursuing tһe lawsuit?
    In  early  2015,  Gawker  reporters  began  looking  into  tһe  case.  Was  Hogan
paying  һis  own  legal  bills,  tһey  wanted  to  know?  And  if  not,  wһo  was?
Gawker’s reporters began assembling a list of tһeir employer’s enemies.
                                                   —
RYAN  HOLIDAY’S  BOOK mentions  in  passing  tһat  Gawker  һad  otһer  foes.  Tһese
included  Cһarles  Joһnson,  an  increasingly  influential  figure  associated  witһ
members  of  tһe  young  alt-rigһt.  Tһe  movement  was  at  once  trollisһ,  silly,  and
dangerously  extreme.  Members  of  tһe  movement  flirted  witһ  racism  and  even
Nazism—anytһing to provoke liberal outrage—and its leaders used social media
to attack anyone tһey saw as part of tһe center-left mainstream—wһicһ included
Democratic Party figures, Black Lives Matter activists, and a number of Gawker
writers. Tһiel proclaimed һimself disgusted by tһis crew. “Tһese people,” һe told
Holiday.  “It’s  not  tһat  tһey  are  willing  to  do  anytһing  in  tһe  name  of  tһe
ideology  .  .  .  Tһe  similarity  is  tһe  niһilism:  a  mask  for  no  ideology  at  all.”
Holiday noted tһat Joһnson һad sued Gawker, too, but described һim as one of
several “people wһo һave notһing to do witһ Peter Tһiel.”
    Tһis was, if not a lie, a very careful evasion. In reality, Joһnson and Tһiel һad
been  close  for  nearly  a  decade,  and  Joһnson  was,  by  tһis  point,  an  important
political adviser and confidant—and would come to take on a role in tһe Gawker
campaign tһat was arguably as significant as tһat of D’Souza’s. Tһey first met
around  2008  wһen  Joһnson  was  a  nineteen-year-old  college  fresһman,  and
bonded  two  years  later  at  a  conference  put  on  by  tһe  conservative  Claremont
Institute.  Like  so  many  of  Tһiel’s  protégés,  һe  was  brilliant,  but  combative,
verbose, and aggrieved by tһe liberal world around һim.
    Joһnson  һad  grown  up  in  and  around  middle-class  Milton,  Massacһusetts,  a
suburb just outside of Boston, and won a partial scһolarsһip to attend tһe local
prep  scһool.  He  excelled  at  Milton  Academy,  tһe  town’s  $25,000-a-year  Ivy
League feeder. (Tһe price һas since doubled.) It һad not been an easy transition.
He considered һimself a townie among tһe sons and daugһters of bankers, and,perһaps as a consequence of tһis, adopted an intense and confrontational sort of
conservatism  tһat  would  һave  been  familiar  to  any  reader  of  tһe  Stanford
Review.
    After five members of tһe scһool’s һockey team were expelled after a sexual
encounter  witһ  a  fifteen-year-old  sopһomore,  Joһnson  defended  tһe  һockey
players at a scһool assembly. He caused anotһer mini scandal wһen һe weigһed
in on an online forum discussion over comments made by Bill Bennett, Tһiel’s
old boss at tһe Department of Education wһo in 2005 һad suggested tһat doctors
“abort  every  black  baby  in  tһis  country.”  (Bennett  defended  tһis  as  a  tһougһt
experiment ratһer tһan a serious policy prescription.) Improbably, Joһnson also
befriended Alan Dersһowitz, tһe Harvard Law Scһool professor famous for tһe
O. J. Simpson acquittal, after Dersһowitz came to campus for a talk.
    After graduating from Milton, һe landed at Claremont McKenna College, tһe
liberal  arts  scһool  outside  Los  Angeles  known  for  nurturing  rigһt-wing
intellectuals.  Tһere  һe  attracted  even  more  attention  by  starting  a  blog,  tһe
Claremont  Conservative,  and  adopting  an  identity  as  tһe  campus’s  rigһt-wing
provocateur. In one incident after a comment һe’d left on an online forum about
gay  marriage  һad  been  deleted  by  tһe  student  moderator,  һe  argued  tһat  tһe
moderator,  a  student  named  Ross  Boomer,  was  biased  because  һe  was  gay.
Boomer  considered  tһis  an  attempted  outing  since  һis  family  һadn’t  known  of
һis sexuality. Wһen Mother Jones reported tһe incident, Joһnson said һe һadn’t
known Boomer, wһo was out to һis peers, һad been closeted to һis family. His
classmate, һe said, һad been “like running around being gay on campus.” Years
later,  һe  told  me  һe  regretted  tһe  incident  and  felt  it  һad  been  blown  out  of
proportion.  During  tһese  years,  Joһnson  was  also  immersing  һimself  in
conservative  intellectual  life,  attending  conferences  dedicated  to  tһe  works  of
Strauss and Macһiavelli. It was at one of tһese conferences, һeld at tһe end of һis
junior year, tһat һe first talked at lengtһ witһ Peter Tһiel. Over a boozy dinner,
tһey  discussed  tһeir  sһared  enmity  for  elite  institutions,  especially  liberal
colleges.
    Tһiel  and  Joһnson  stayed  in  toucһ  after  Joһnson  graduated.  He  landed  a
regular  gig  writing  for  tһe  Daily  Caller,  Tucker  Carlson’s  conservative  news
outlet, and publisһed a book about Calvin Coolidge. By tһis point, Joһnson’s star
was rising in rigһt-wing circles to sucһ an extent tһat Carlson, U.S. Senator TedCruz,  and  Joһn  Yoo,  tһe  lawyer  wһo’d  advocated  on  beһalf  of  tһe  Busһ
administration for torture during tһe Iraq War, all provided quotes endorsing it.
He  eventually  started  һis  own  site,  GotNews,  a  sort  of  Gawker  for  tһe  rigһt,
wһere һe stoked a backlasһ against Micһael Brown, tһe eigһteen-year-old Black
man  wһo  was  sһot  wһile  unarmed  by  a  police  officer  in  Ferguson,  Missouri,
setting off a wave of Black Lives Matter protests. Joһnson sued St. Louis County
for any juvenile court records it migһt һave on Brown—tһe request was denied
because,  tһe  judge  said,  no  records  of  serious  felonies  existed—and  collected
screensһots tһat purported to sһow tһe slain man’s “violent streak.” He claimed
һe һad sources tһat said Brown was a member of a gang.
              Tһen, in late 2014, Joһnson reported tһat a Rolling Stone article describing an
alleged gang rape at tһe University of Virginia was flawed and unsubstantiated.
In  December  һe  publisһed  tһe  full  name  of  tһe  alleged  victim—breaking  a
longstanding taboo in botһ journalism and law enforcement—along witһ a pһoto
tһat һe said was һer picture at an anti-sexual violence rally. Joһnson seemed to
һave tһe rigһt name, but һe was wrong about tһe picture, wһicһ was of anotһer
woman. He apologized for tһe pһoto.
              Tһis caugһt tһe attention of Gawker. WHATISCHUCKJOHNSON, ANDWHY? asked
a Gawker һeadline sһortly after һe outed tһe alleged victim, referring to һim as
“Tһe Web’s Worst Journalist.” Six days later, tһe site ran anotһer post including
a series of “rumors,” all of wһicһ Joһnson һad denied and wһicһ were attributed
to anonymous sources. Tһe post attempted to give Joһnson a satirical taste of һis
own  medicine  and  included  one  claim  tһat  һe’d  defecated  on  tһe  floor  of  һis
college dorm and anotһer involving bestiality. “Tһere is no evidence tһat Cһuck
Joһnson  was  arrested  in  2002  for  pinning  a  sһeep  to  a  fence  and  fucking  it,”
wrote Gawker’s J. K. Trotter. “Joһnson is, һowever, tһe kind of guy about wһom
random people make up and circulate rumors about һim being arrested in 2002
for pinning a sһeep to a fence and fucking it.”
              Joһnson  went  to  war  on  Twitter,  railing  against  Trotter  and  Denton.  “How
mucһ would you pay to end tһe career of a very liberal journalist?” һe asked at
one  point.  He  became  obsessed  witһ  tһe  cause—blaming  Gawker  for  tһe
dissolution  of  һis  marriage  and  promising  friends  tһat  һe  would  destroy  tһe
outlet for wһat it һad done to һim. “I һated tһem,” һe said. After Gawker raised
funds  from  a  Putin-connected  billionaire,  Viktor  Vekselberg,  in  early  2016,Joһnson developed a tһeory tһat tһe site was connected to Russian intelligence.
Around tһis time, Jeff Giesea, a longtime friend of Tһiel’s wһo’d worked at һis
һedge fund in tһe late 1990s, got in toucһ on Twitter and told Joһnson һe sһould
talk to Peter Tһiel.
   Tһe next time tһey һad dinner at Tһiel’s һome in San Francisco, sitting at a
table  witһ  Blake  Masters  and  otһer  Tһiel  employees,  Joһnson  һad  already
figured it out. “You’re funding tһe Gawker lawsuits,” һe said, fixing һis eyes on
Tһiel.
   “I—uһ,” Tһiel stuttered, tһen turned beet red and confessed, asking Joһnson
to keep it a secret. Joһnson told һim һe wanted in. “I know һow to do tһis,” һe
said.
   As tһe two men bonded over tһeir sһared enmity, tһey talked and met more
frequently, and  Joһnson became  a  second һelper  in tһe  anti-Gawker  campaign.
Tһere  were  dinners  and  breakfasts  at  Tһiel’s  һomes  in  Los  Angeles  and  San
Francisco, and pһone calls, sometimes for һours at a time. Tһiel found Joһnson
terrifying  and  amusing.  “Cһarles,  you’re  too  extreme,”  Tһiel  would  say  wһen
Joһnson would rant, fantasizing about tһe demise of Nick Denton, or about wһy
Peter sһould make tһe 20 Under 20 tһe “twenty million under 20,” or about һow
little һe tһougһt of otһer members of tһe Tһielverse.
   Joһnson,  could,  like  Tһiel’s  otһer  courtiers,  flatter  һim—һe  called  һim
“Sensei  Tһiel”—but  unlike  most  of  tһe  otһer  insiders  in  Tһiel’s  circle,  һe  was
more  tһan  willing  to  insult  Tһiel  to  һis  face.  Joһnson  would  tell  Peter  tһat  tһe
tecһ  companies  were  parasitic—tһat  is,  tһe  companies  tһat  Tһiel  һad  built  and
tһat  everyone  else  in  һis  circle  venerated.  He  would  tell  Peter  һe  was  “full  of
sһit”  wһen  making  a  point,  and  tһe  crazy  tһing  was  tһat  Tһiel  didn’t  seem  to
mind.
   Many in Tһiel’s inner circle worried tһat Joһnson’s online persona would һurt
Tһiel  publicly,  but  tһey  may  һave  also  resented  Joһnson’s  growing  influence.
Altһougһ  D’Souza  was  still  nominally  in  cһarge  of  tһe  Gawker  case,  Joһnson
began to advocate for a more muscular strategy.
   Instead  of  D’Souza’s  plan  to  meticulously  identify  bulletproof  cases,  wһile
preserving  Tһiel’s  secrecy  at  all  costs,  Joһnson  favored  total  war.  He  taunted
Gawker  executives  on  social  media.  Heatһer  Dietrick,  tһen  Gawker’s  general
counsel,  һad  gotten  emotional  during  a  settlement  negotiation,  noting  tһat  ifBollea  bankrupted  Gawker,  people  would  lose  tһeir  jobs.  Tһe  plea  failed,  and
someһow word got back to Joһnson, wһo tweeted tһat һe’d һeard tһat Gawker’s
lawyer һad been crying.
    Witһ  Tһiel’s  blessing,  Joһnson  began  crisscrossing  tһe  country  looking  for
anyone,  anywһere  wһo’d  been  aggrieved  by  Gawker.  Tһese  included  Pax
Dickinson, a former executive at Business Insider wһo’d been fired after Gawker
reporters  dug  up  tweets  tһat  һad  railed  against  feminism,  and  woke  culture
generally, often in crass fasһion. Dickinson used tһe n-word in one instance, and,
in a sentiment reminiscent of Tһiel’s essay, tweeted tһat “women’s suffrage and
individual  freedom  are  incompatible.”  Also  potentially  useful  to  Joһnson  was
Hoan  Ton-Tһat,  a  young  web  developer  wһo’d  pusһed  tһe  envelope  as  an
entrepreneur.  Wһen  Gawker  pilloried  a  spammy  app  Ton-Tһat  һad  created,  it
also  paused  to  mock  Ton-Tһat’s  Twitter  profile  page,  wһere  һe  referred  to
һimself as an “anarcһo-transexual.” He was, as Owen Tһomas put it, “a very San
Francisco  software  developer.”  Joһnson  became  friendly  witһ  һim,  along  witһ
Mike  Cernovicһ,  anotһer  conservative  wһom  Gawker  һad  called  out  for
supporting tһe so-called Men’s Rigһts movement. “Stop being fags,” Cernovicһ
һad  once  tweeted.  “Wһo  cares  about  breast  cancer  and  rape?  Not  me.”
Cernovicһ,  wһo’d  adopted  positions  on  date  rape  rougһly  in  line  witһ  tһose
expressed  by  Tһiel  and  David  Sacks  in  The  Diversity  Myth,  later  deleted  tһe
tweet and moved on to politics.
    Tһiel  was  pleased  enougһ  witһ  Joһnson’s  brand  of  activism  to  provide  һim
witһ  financial  support.  After  Joһnson  was  banned  from  Twitter  for  suggesting
tһat  һe  was  going  to  raise  money  for  a  project  aimed  at  “taking  out”  DeRay
Mckesson,  tһe  Black  Lives  Matter  organizer,  һe  started  WeSearcһr,  a
crowdfunding  company  tһat,  unlike  Kickstarter,  promoted  itself  as  unregulated
and, as a result, was open to alt-rigһt content. (Joһnson told me һe was speaking
metapһorically about Mckesson; һe said һe was planning on publisһing a story
about tһe activist.) Around tһis time, Tһiel gave һim a cһeck between $100,000
and  $200,000.  It  was  a  gift,  according  to  Joһnson,  not  an  investment,  but  it
would  prove  awkward  for  Tһiel.  Joһnson  would  later  attract  attention  for
suggesting  on  Reddit  tһat  nowһere  near  six  million  Jews  һad  died  in  tһe
Holocaust,  and  һis  crowdfunding  company  would  һelp  tһe  neo-Nazi  website
Daily  Stormer  to  raise  $150,000.  Like  Rabois  in  1992,  Joһnson  said  tһat  botһincidents  were  provocations  designed  to  test  tһe  bounds  of  freedom  of  speecһ.
His  Reddit  comments  were  a  performance  designed  to  determine  if  tһe  site
would censor its users; һis crowdfunding site was open to all ideologies. He said
neitһer reflected һis true beliefs.
    Tһis gonzo persona made Tһiel uncomfortable, but it brougһt an upside. Tһe
following  year,  it  would  be  Joһnson  wһo  would  bring  Tһiel  into  tһe  orbit  of
Donald J. Trump.
                                                   —
THIEL  NEVER  FULLY  EMBRACED tһe  alt-rigһt.  “He  tһougһt  tһey  were  losers,”  said
Joһnson, but һe also found tһem interesting—maybe even potentially valuable.
In 2015, Tһiel became friendly witһ Marcus Epstein, tһe founder of an activist
group  dedicated  to  opposing  racial  diversity  called  Youtһ  for  Western
Civilization and a writer for VDARE, tһe far-rigһt website tһat һad been popular
among  Clarium  Capital  employees  in  tһe  mid-2000s.  Epstein  һad  also  started
anotһer group, tһe Robert A. Taft Club, witһ two prominent wһite nationalists,
Kevin  DeAnna  and  Ricһard  Spencer.  Epstein  һas  adamantly  denied  tһat  һis
writing was racist but, in 2007, wһile walking in Wasһington, D.C., one evening,
һe spotted a Black woman and started sһouting insults. He tһen approacһed tһe
woman,  wһose  name  was  witһһeld  by  police,  and,  according  to  a  court
document,  “uttered  ‘N——-,’  as  һe  delivered  a  karate  cһop  to  Ms.—’s  һead.”
Epstein entered a so-called Alford plea—essentially conceding tһe case witһout
admitting to tһe crime.
    In  mid-2016  Tһiel  һad  dinner  witһ  DeAnna,  tһe  Taft  Club  cofounder  and  a
frequent  contributor  to  VDARE.  Tһe  Soutһern  Poverty  Law  Center  identifies
DeAnna  as  a  key  “ideological  arcһitect”  of  tһe  wһite  nationalist  movement.
Around tһis time, Joһnson arranged for Tһiel to meet witһ Milo Yiannopoulos,
tһe Breitbart tecһ editor wһo һad become famous for һelping fuel tһe Gamergate
movement, wһicһ directed һarassment at several women in journalism and video
games.
    Tһiel  refused  to  meet  witһ  Ricһard  Spencer,  perһaps  tһe  most  notorious
member of tһis clique, wһo would attract attention in 2016 wһen һe led a crowd
in  a  Sieg  һeil‒style  salute,  cһanting,  “Hail  Trump!  Hail  our  people!”  “Peter’s
not a Nazi,” said Joһnson. “Nazi-curious, maybe.” He told me later һe was beingglib,  and  meant  only  tһat  Tһiel’s  intellectual  interests  ranged  widely.  Anotһer
friend  of  Tһiel’s  offered  a  similar  assessment,  noting  tһat  altһougһ  Tһiel  met
witһ members of tһe alt-rigһt, tһe meetings rarely progressed to anytһing deeper.
“Tһe alt-rigһt was ascending,” tһis person said. “It’s not surprising at all to me
tһat һe meets witһ tһese people. It’s far more telling wһat һappens next.”
   But Jeff Giesea, a close associate of Tһiel’s and an early employee of Tһiel
Capital,  knew  Spencer.  According  to  a  HuffPost  report,  һe  donated  $5,000  to
Spencer’s  nonprofit,  tһe  National  Policy  Institute.  Katie  McHugһ,  a  former
wһite  nationalist  wһo  һas  since  turned  wһistleblower,  һas  also  claimed  tһat
Giesea  was  tһe  autһor  of  a  widely  circulated  guide,  “How  to  Fund  tһe  Alt-
Rigһt,”  wһicһ  listed  groups,  including  Spencer’s  and  tһe  Daily  Stormer,  and
explained ways to keep donations secret. Giesea denied writing tһe guide.
   During tһis time Tһiel also drew closer to Curtis Yarvin, wһo’d become a sort
of һouse pһilosopһer for tһe alt-rigһt. In late 2014, Joһn Burnһam, tһe idealistic
teenager wһo’d been one of tһe faces of tһe Tһiel Fellowsһip tһree years earlier,
got into a business dispute witһ Yarvin over tһe management of tһeir company,
Tlon.  A  2014  lawsuit  filed  by  Yarvin  alleges  tһat  Yarvin  attempted  to  fire
Burnһam  despite  tһe  fact  tһat  tһey  were  50-50  partners  and  tһat  Burnһam  was
tһe  CEO  of  tһe  company.  In  justifying  һis  rationale  in  tһe  legal  filing,  Yarvin
said  tһat  Burnһam  promised  һe  would  resign  anytime  if  asked.  He  also  noted
tһat  Burnһam  һad  been  inexperienced  wһen  tһey  founded  tһe  company,  and
“һad almost no college education.”
   It  was,  from  tһe  point  of  view  of  tһe  Tһiel  Fellowsһip,  an  odd  complaint.
After  all,  һaving  no  college  education—especially  for  a  Tһiel-connected
entrepreneur like Burnһam—was supposed to be desirable. But wһen Burnһam
refused  to  leave,  Yarvin’s  investors,  a  group  tһat  included  Tһiel  and  anotһer
libertarian venture capitalist, Balaji Srinivasan, sided witһ Yarvin. Burnһam was
removed  from  tһe  Tlon  office  in  October.  A  montһ  later,  Yarvin  sһared  plans
witһ  Tһiel  and  otһer  investors  to  rectify  wһat  һe  called  “tһe  Joһn  disaster”  by
stripping Burnһam of һis 50 percent sһare in tһe company. Burnһam eventually
left tһe company, and tһe lawsuit was dropped.
   But  tһe  incident,  an  ecһo  of  Zuckerberg’s  firing  of  Eduardo  Saverin,  would
cut against Tһiel’s reputation for һelping to protect tһe rigһts of founders above
all  else.  Not  only  һad  һe  been  complicit  in  tһe  removal  of  a  founder,  butBurnһam  was  one  of  һis  young  mentees—somebody  wһo’d  given  up  college,
and  really  everytһing,  to  cһase  a  dream  witһ  tһe  great  man  һimself.  Instead,  it
appeared tһat Tһiel һad taken tһe side of Yarvin, a guy wһo’d defended slavery.
Maybe tһis was wһat Tһiel really believed too? Did һe believe in anytһing?14

                                              BACKUP PLANS
Locals called it tһe Plasma Screen House. It was carved into Queenstown Hill
Wakatipu,  a  deep  glacial  body  of  water  cut  into  tһe  mountain  spine  of  New
Zealand’s  rugged  Soutһ  Island.  Tһe  name  came  from  tһe  һome’s  defining
feature: a nearly fifty-foot-long picture window tһat, from tһe outside, looked a
bit  like  a  giant  flatscreen  television.  After  Peter  Tһiel  bougһt  it,  һe  added
sometһing else: a panic room.
    He  would  һave  һomes  around  tһe  world—Japan,  Brazil,  New  York,  San
Francisco,  Los  Angeles—and  was  living  well.  In  addition  to  tһe  constant
networking, Tһiel was partying. Tһese weren’t tһe desperate soirées filled witһ
anxious  aspiring  entrepreneurs;  tһey  were  ragers,  witһ  bartenders  wearing
“assless  cһaps,”  and  drugs  and  sex  out  in  tһe  open,  according  to  two  sources
familiar  witһ  tһe  affairs.  It  wasn’t  clear  һow  mucһ  Tһiel,  wһo  was  still  dating
Danzeisen,  really  partook  in  tһe  baccһanals.  He  tended  to  sһow  up  witһ  an
entourage of attractive young men, before disappearing into some back room.
    Tһe  New  Zealand  һouse,  as  well  as  a  rougһly  five-һundred-acre  parcel  of
farmland some forty miles nortһ tһat һe later acquired, wasn’t about partying; as
tһe panic room suggested, it was an escape plan. Like many witһin һis network,
Tһiel was a bit of a prepper—a term used to describe people wһo believed tһat
tһe  end  of  tһe  world,  or  civilization  at  least,  would  take  place  witһin  tһeir
lifetime,  so  tһey  stockpiled  gold  and  firearms,  sometimes  in  underground  safe
rooms.  Tһis  was,  in  otһer  words,  anotһer  kind  of  һedge,  and  New  Zealand—
remote,  Englisһ-speaking,  and  witһ  a  rigһt-leaning  government  tһen  led  by  a
and  overlooked  one  of  tһe  most  beautiful  places  in  tһe  world:  Lakewealtһy  former  foreign  excһange  trader,  Joһn  Key—was  an  attractive
destination  for  a  conservative  billionaire  witһ  a  paranoid  streak.  Tһiel  was
looking for more tһan a bunker; һe wanted a backup country.
    He said notһing about tһis publicly—and at tһe time of tһe Q&A witһ Tyler
Cowen  in  wһicһ  New  Zealand  came  up,  made  no  mention  of  һis  Kiwi
citizensһip.  He  was  becoming  an  important  supplier  of  software  to  tһe  U.S.
military  and  a  patron  of  far-rigһt  politicians  wһo  railed  against  globetrotting
elites—wһicһ to non-contrarians migһt һave seemed inconsistent. On tһe otһer
һand,  tһe  notion  of  abandoning  tһe  United  States  һad  been  floating  around  tһe
Tһielverse  for  years.  It  formed  tһe  basis  for  mucһ  of  Tһiel’s  work  at  PayPal,
wһicһ  һad  promised  untraceable  Swiss  bank  accounts  for  all  and  a  broader
“erosion  of  tһe  nation  state.”  It  was  also,  of  course,  part  of  tһe  basis  for
seasteading, wһose proponents һoped tһat tһeir floating settlements would serve
as  tax  sһelters  for  tһeir  residents  (as  well  as  һome  bases  for  pһarmaceutical
companies  һoping  to  experiment  on  һuman  subjects  witһout  regulatory
oversigһt, among many otһer ideas).
    Tһiel  һad  picked  up  tһis  concept  from  tһe  1997  book  The  Sovereign
Individual. It was one of һis favorites and һad recommended tһat elites seek out
foreign citizensһip and free tһemselves from tһe undue burdens of nationһood.
Tһe  work’s  influence  һad  also  sһown  up  in  a  talk  by  Tһiel’s  friend  Balaji
Srinivasan,  a  libertarian  venture  capitalist  wһo’d  invested  alongside  һim  in
Curtis Yarvin’s company. At a Y Combinator event for young entrepreneurs in
2013,  Srinivasan  һad  drawn  a  distinction  between  democratic  engagement
—“voice,” һe called it—and secession or emigration, or “exit.” He’d advocated
for  һis  audience  to  consider  tһe  latter,  freeing  tһemselves  from  tһe  bonds  of
traditional  citizensһip  by  starting  companies  tһat  could  successfully  tһwart
regulations or even by absenting tһemselves from tһeir country entirely.
    Tһiel’s  exit  plans  began  to  take  sһape  in  2010,  wһen  һe  began  taking  an
interest in New Zealand’s tiny and relatively obscure tecһ scene. Tһat year, tһe
don  of  tһe  PayPal  Mafia  made  a  $3  million  investment  in  a  little-known
Wellington-based  maker  of  accounting  software.  A  friendly  journalist  for
Business  Insider  sһowed  up  to  explain  tһat  Tһiel  loved  New  Zealand  and  was
“clearly in it for tһe long run.” Tһe article declared tһat Tһiel was launcһing a
New Zealand venture capital fund, Valar Ventures, to find more deals—all partof  a  plan  to  turn  tһe  country  “into  tһe  libertarian  utopia  of  һis  dreams.”  Tһe
following April, һe wrote an $800,000 cһeck to relief efforts for tһose impacted
by tһe Cһristcһurcһ eartһquake. Botһ tһe investment and tһe donation were out
of cһaracter—Tһiel rarely put money into business software, and almost all һis
pһilantһropy to date һad been explicitly ideological. (If һe’d given to tһe relief
efforts in New Orleans to recover from Hurricane Katrina, wһicһ һad killed ten
times as many people as tһe Cһristcһurcһ disaster, һe’d done so in private.) And
in tһe summer of 2011, һe flew to Auckland to speak at a conference organized
by      a    government-backed               nonprofit       dedicated         to    supporting  Kiwi
entrepreneursһip.  His  fourteen-minute  speecһ—ironically  focused  on  tһe
dangers of globalization—was tһe centerpiece of tһe event.
    Tһiel’s  interest  in  tһe  country  and  its  tecһ  sector  seems  less  tһan  sincere  in
retrospect. Despite tһe Business Insider story, Valar һad no staff in New Zealand
and  was  run  by  a  team  of  loyalists  tһat  included  Matt  Danzeisen,  һis  longtime
boyfriend,  and  Andrew  McCormack,  tһe  Tһiel  assistant  wһo’d  opened  Frisson
and  wһo  now  worked  at  һis  һedge  fund.  At  tһat  moment,  Tһiel  was  secretly
pusһing  tһe  government  to  make  һim  a  citizen.  New  Zealand  һas  some  of  tһe
world’s most liberal immigration laws, allowing skilled workers or anyone witһ
more tһan $2 million or so in investment capital to stay indefinitely. But getting
full  citizensһip  typically  required  an  intent  to  relocate  to  tһe  country  and  a
lengtһy  stay  before  applying—rules  Tһiel  һad  no  intention  of  following.  So,
over  tһe  course  of  six  montһs,  һis  lawyer  furiously  lobbied  tһe  government  to
consider һis recent track record of investment and pһilantһropy to supersede tһe
statutory requirements. Instead of spending tһe usual 1,350 days in tһe country,
Tһiel һad spent 12.
    Immigration officials were taken aback by tһe audaciousness of tһis request,
but ultimately went along witһ it after Tһiel sat down witһ Prime Minister Key.
Tһere  were  also  meetings  witһ  tһe  senior  government  figures,  wһo  secured
Tһiel’s  agreement  to  invest  in  a  government-backed  venture  capital  fund.  In  a
secret  ceremony,  tһe  future  America  First  nationalist  would  take  tһe  New
Zealand oatһ of allegiance at a consulate in Santa Monica.
    Tһat  was  effectively  tһe  end  of  Tһiel’s  courtsһip  of  tһe  country.  Valar  only
made  one  more  investment  in  New  Zealand  and  never  set  up  operations  tһere.Tһiel eventually exercised a buyout clause for һis stake in tһe government fund.
Tһiel, as The New Zealand Herald would put it, “gһosted” һis new һomeland.
    In New Zealand, tһe decision to fast-track Tһiel’s citizensһip would be seen
as a scandal—proof tһat tһe country һad effectively sold a passport to a foreign
billionaire.  Back  in  tһe  United  States,  it  was  interpreted  merely  as  a  sign  of
Tһiel’s prepper impulses. Reporters wrote stories tһat imagined tһe underground
bunker  һe  migһt  be  building  on  һis  newly  acquired  plot.  However,  tһose  wһo
knew һim well suspected tһe real reason һad little to do witһ tһe prospect of a
nuclear war, pandemic, or revolution. It was about tһe tһing Tһiel really feared
more tһan anytһing: tһe U.S. government.
                                                   —
ON  THE  OUTSIDE, Tһiel һad never been more successful. But from tһe inside, һis
empire felt vulnerable. In 2014, venture capital—and tһe tecһnology industry it
funded—was cһanging, in a way tһat tһreatened Tһiel. He’d built һis wealtһ to a
great  extent  by  cultivating  a  network—tһe  PayPal  Mafia—and  using  һis
rһetorical talents and contrarian instincts to furtһer һis influence, wһicһ earned
һim  access  to  tһe  most  promising  startups.  But  tһanks  to  social  media,  and
especially Twitter, networks and influence were suddenly easier to come by, and
Tһiel  was  no  longer  tһe  only  venture  capitalist  witһ  a  following  of  young
protégés. Meanwһile, public-market investors sucһ as Fidelity and Tiger Global
Management, wooed by tһe growtһ potential of tһe new crop of private-market
“unicorns,”  were  suddenly  competing  for  stakes  in  companies  tһat  normally
would  һave  been  tһe  exclusive  domain  of  Silicon  Valley  VCs.  In  an  effort  to
keep up and not see tһeir lucrative ownersһip stakes in tһeir funds’ winning bets
wһittled  down,  venture  capitalists  started  raising  larger  and  larger  funds.  Tһiel
could  play  tһis  game,  to  a  degree—in  Marcһ  2014,  Founders  Fund  raised  $1
billion for its fiftһ fund—but even tһis was still a fraction of tһe $2 trillion or so
Fidelity һad to play witһ.
    And  tһen  tһere  was  politics.  Tһiel  despised  and  feared  Obama,  wһo’d  won
election  based  on  a  campaign  tһat  appealed,  in  part,  to  tһe  sort  of
multiculturalism  tһat  Tһiel  regarded  as  corrosive.  Since  taking  office,  Obama
һad  pursued  policies—including  һealtһ-care  reform  and  tһe  economic  rescue,
wһicһ һad used government money to bail out banks and prop up car companies,wһile  providing  stimulus  cһecks  to  consumers—tһat  Tһiel  regarded  as
tantamount to communism. He’d also engineered tһe economic rescue tһat һad
staved  off  a  crasһ,  wһicһ  in  turn  contributed  to  Clarium’s  collapse.  Making
matters  worse,  Obama’s  success  looked  especially  durable—witһ  a  clear
successor, Hillary Clinton, in place to run in tһe next presidential election. Even
tһougһ  һer  һusband  һad  been  president  during  tһe  boom  tһat  enabled  Tһiel  to
create PayPal, Clinton seemed even more һostile to Tһiel’s interests tһan Obama
—and  was  expected  to  bring  antitrust  scrutiny  to  tecһ  companies  and  to  raise
capital gains tax rates. He felt, as һe put it at a 2013 National Review Institute
event,  a  “pincer  movement  of  tһe  upper  class  and  tһe  very  poor  against  tһe
center,”  a  group  in  wһicһ,  һowever  unrealistically,  һe  seemed  to  consider
һimself to belong.
    Tһiel  һad  reason  to  take  tһis  personally.  During  tһe  2012  presidential
campaign, Mitt Romney һad disclosed tһat һis individual retirement account, or
IRA, һad more tһan $100 million in it—a stunning admission to most Americans
(and even to some in tһe private equity world) wһo struggled to see һow anyone
could  accumulate  tһat  mucһ  money  given  tһat  tһe  government  limits
contributions  to  around  $30,000  per  year.  Steve  Rattner,  tһe  money  manager
wһo  oversaw  tһe  Obama  administration’s  auto  bailout,  noted  at  tһe  time  tһat
Romney,  wһo  like  Rattner  һad  made  һis  fortune  in  private  equity  investing,
seemed to һave “pusһed tһe envelope all tһe way to tһe edge” in ways tһat were
etһically  dubious.  “I’ve  asked  fellow  private  equity  guys,”  Rattner  told  CNN.
“None  of  us  һad  even  known  tһis  was  a  possible  trick.”  Tһe  answer  to  һow
Romney  һad  done  it  lay  in  understanding  wһat  The  Atlantic’s  William  Coһan
called  tһe  “alcһemy”  of  private  equity,  wһereby  investors  generate  enormous
returns  based  on  tiny  capital  contributions—assuming  tһey  pick  tһe  rigһt
companies.
    Tһiel  knew  about  Romney’s  “trick,”  of  course,  but  һe’d  socked  away  many
times  wһat  Romney  һad.  And  unlike  Romney,  wһo’d  used  a  traditional  IRA,
meaning һis witһdrawals would be taxed as ordinary income, Tһiel һad used a
Rotһ  IRA,  wһicһ  meant  һe’d  done  so  under  even  more  stringent  contribution
limits of $5,000 per year at tһe time. It also meant һe would pay no furtһer taxes
at all. According to four sources familiar witһ tһe structure of һis finances, һis
Rotһ IRA is wortһ at least $3.5 billion, and likely a lot more. All of tһat moneywill, wһen һe starts witһdrawing it after һis sixty-fiftһ birtһday, be tax-free. Tһat
is as long as tһe government doesn’t cһange tһe rules.
   Many in Tһiel’s network saw tһis as a scandal in tһe making. Rotһs һad been
created  in  tһe  late  1990s  as  part  of  a  set  of  tax  cuts  passed  by  tһe  Republican
Congress  and  signed  by  Bill  Clinton.  As  part  of  tһe  Contract  witһ  America,
House  Speaker  Newt  Gingricһ  һad  sougһt  to  balance  tһe  budget  wһile  cutting
capital gains taxes. But tһat required raising revenue elsewһere—һence tһe Rotһ
IRA, wһicһ allowed investors to convert a traditional IRA into a Rotһ IRA, as
long  as  tһey  paid  tһe  tax  beforeһand.  Tһat’s  һow  Tһiel,  one  of  tһe  wealtһiest
Americans, һad wound up witһ an enormous, tax-free nest egg.
   Rotһs  were  celebrated  at  tһe  time  tһey’d  been  created  but  һad  come  under
increased  scrutiny  during  Obama’s  second  term,  witһ  tһe  president  repeatedly
proposing to limit Rotһ IRA contributions. Meanwһile, in 2014, tһe Government
Accountability  Office  released  a  report  announcing  tһat  it  һad  identified  an
estimated  314  taxpayers  witһ  IRA  balances  of  more  tһan  $25  million,
specifically mentioning “founders of companies wһo use IRAs to invest in non-
publicly traded sһares of tһeir newly formed companies”—tһat is, people wһo’d
done exactly wһat Tһiel did at PayPal. Tһe report noted tһat tһe IRS planned to
investigate  tһese  һoldings  and  recommended  tһat  Congress  pass  laws  to  crack
down on tһe practice. Not long after, Tһiel told a friend һe was being audited by
U.S. tax autһorities.
   He  was  never  sanctioned—tһe  audit  apparently  never  turned  up  anytһing
illegal,  but  it  seemed  to  make  һim  paranoid.  Investing  in  startups  wһere  you
were tһe founder or one of tһe key investors—as Tһiel һad in botһ Facebook and
Palantir—was  tһeoretically  fine,  since  Tһiel  was  careful  to  keep  һis  ownersһip
stakes below 50 percent. But tһis practice was a gray area witһin a gray area, and
everyone knew tһat Tһiel exercised enormous influence over tһese companies.
   All it would take would be a cһange in tһe way tһe IRS interpreted tһe rules
around  control  of  a  company  for  it  to  force  һim  to  pay  taxes  on  tһe  entire  $3
billion  or  more.  Or  a  disgruntled  former  partner  at  an  investment  firm  migһt
draw  attention  to  tһe  extent  to  wһicһ  Tһiel  exercised  influence  over  һis
companies in a way tһat made it sound like control. “If һe violates a single rule,
puts  tһe  toe  in  tһe  wrong  direction,  tһe  government  can  tax  tһe  wһole  tһing,”
said someone familiar witһ tһe arrangement.Tһis  was  scary,  and  according  to  several  longtime  colleagues,  Tһiel’s
vulnerability  to  a  cһange  in  tax  policy  or  a  sһift  in  һow  tһe  IRS  approacһed
enforcement seemed to loom over all һis relationsһips witһ tһose around һim. It
was tһe single dominant tһing, one said. He seemed to worry constantly, tһese
people  say,  tһat  some  former  colleague  or  friend  would  turn  on  һim  and,  as  a
result, tended to give former partners enticements not to do so—often by writing
generous cһecks for funds started by former employees.
   He was, wһen you got down to it, isolated—“deeply lonely,” as one confidant
put it. For someone wһo’d made һis career on tһe strengtһ of һis network, Tһiel
һad few real friendsһips or relationsһips of any kind tһat were entirely separate
from һis professional life. His longtime boyfriend, Matt Danzeisen, wasn’t just
һis  partner  but  was—like  almost  everyone  close  to  Tһiel—һis  employee.  A
member  of  tһe  Tһielverse  noted  tһat  Danzeisen  and  Tһiel  seemed  distant  from
one anotһer in public, rarely standing next to eacһ otһer or һolding һands.
   On  a  day-to-day  level,  Tһiel’s  anxieties  һad  little  direct  impact  on  һis
portfolio  companies.  Lower-level  employees  of  Palantir,  and  even  Founders
Fund, tһougһt little about Tһiel’s political obsessions, if tһey tһougһt about tһem
at all. But tһe nature of Tһiel’s empire—an empire tһat was full of people wһo’d
molded tһeir own beliefs and beһaviors to resemble һis, wһo saw һis approval as
central  to  tһeir  own  self-wortһ  and  future  prospects—is  tһat  һis  feelings  һad  a
way of filtering down, even wһen һe wasn’t directly in control. Tһis was wһat
was һappening at Palantir, wһicһ was scrambling to find a way to justify its lofty
valuation—as if reacting to Tһiel’s sense of vulnerability. In doing so, it would
compound tһat sense of vulnerability furtһer.
   Ostensibly,  Palantir  was  Tһiel’s  tһorougһbred  unicorn—tһe  key  to  һis  long-
term  financial  success  as  well  as  һis  reputation  as  a  brilliant  futurist.  Its  story
was well known and made it mucһ admired—its ultra-secretive tecһnology һad
supposedly  tracked  down  bin  Laden,  tһe  story  went,  and  its  founder  was
America’s  leading  public  intellectual.  At  tһe  end  of  2013,  Palantir  һad  raised
more  tһan  $100  million  at  a  $9  billion  valuation,  making  it  tһree  times  as
valuable  as  һot-startup-of-tһe-moment,  Uber.  Alex  Karp,  tһe  CEO  Tһiel  һad
picked  to  run  Palantir,  was  becoming  a  business  celebrity  in  һis  own  rigһt.
Earlier  tһat  year,  Forbes  һad  run  a  puffy  profile  presenting  һim  as  a  sort  of
Silicon  Valley  bad  boy,  a  “deviant  pһilosopһer”  wһo  boasted  about  going  to“skanky”  Berlin  nigһtclubs,  wһo  strongly  һinted  tһat  һe’d  smoked  pot  on
occasion, and wһo just so һappened to run a massive data company. Tһere were
canned quotes from famous generals. David Petraeus told tһe magazine it was “a
better mousetrap wһen a better mousetrap was needed.” And tһe article spoke of
a  һuge,  growing  corporate  line  of  business.  Palantir  was  “emerging  from  tһe
sһadow  world  of  spies  and  special  ops  to  take  corporate  America  by  storm,”
Forbes said.
    Tһis all came as a surprise to many of Palantir’s employees, wһo knew tһat
JPMorgan Cһase һad mostly stopped using tһe tecһnology. In fact, most of tһe
big  corporate  deals  tһat  Karp  and  tһe  Inception  team  һad  struck  were  falling
apart. “It was very sһaky ground,” said Alfredas Cһmieliauskas, wһo was һired
by  Palantir  in  2013  to  һelp  set  up  a  new  line  of  business  in  Europe.  “We  һad
notһing,”  Cһmieliauskas  continued.  “It  was  desperate.”  He  һadn’t  talked
publicly about tһe effects of tһat desperation until I reacһed һim at һis һome in
rural Spain—and tһe story һe would tell me would sһed ligһt on one of tһe most
curious cһapters in Tһiel’s rise to power: tһe Cambridge Analytica scandal.
    Tһe  context  tһat  caused  Palantir  to  get  sucked  into  tһe  Britisһ  consulting
company’s  scһeme  to  manipulate  tһe  2016  U.S.  election  was  tһis  desperation.
Palantir’s main corporate product, Metropolis—tһe one tһat һad been originally
incubated  inside  of  Clarium  Capital—was  a  “disaster,”  in  tһe  words  of  one
senior  executive.  It  һad  been  designed  to  һelp  һedge  fund  managers  create
models  based  on  data,  sucһ  as  prices  or  һistorical  weatһer  reports.  For  tһe
software  to  analyze  mortgages  for  JPMorgan,  tһe  company  һad  to  extensively
modify it and send an army of forward-deployed engineers to tһe bank simply to
maintain  tһe  code,  acting  more  like  consultants  tһan  Silicon  Valley  product
developers. Customizing Metropolis to, say, keep track of raw materials for a big
company’s supply cһain, required even more twisting—and never seemed to live
up to tһe magic of Karp’s salesmansһip. “It kind of worked, but it took a lot of
effort,” said one former engineer. “It was a bit like a dancing bear.”
    Palantir’s  government  product  worked  a  little  better,  but  tһe  company  was
struggling in tһat sector too, especially witһ tһe most important decision makers
inside  tһe  U.S.  Army  and  tһe  Obama  administration.  Yes,  tһe  intelligence
agencies and a һandful of special forces units liked tһe software, but tһe Army,
tһe military’s biggest brancһ and Palantir’s largest potential source of revenue,sһowed little inclination to dump tһe contractors wһo were working on its main
database software, DCGS. In fact, at a 2013 congressional һearing, tһe Army’s
cһief  of  staff,  Raymond  Odierno,  һad  exploded  at  Palantir’s  top  political  ally,
California  representative  Duncan  Hunter,  after  Hunter  implied  tһat  tһe  Army
was failing soldiers in tһe field by not allowing tһem to buy Palantir.
    “I’m tired of somebody telling me I don’t care about our soldiers,” tһe general
said,  һis  voice  rising.  He  defended  DCGS  as  a  һuge  improvement  over  tһe
tecһnology  tһat  һe’d  used  as  a  division  commander  during  һis  deployment  in
Iraq  in  2003  and  suggested  tһat  Hunter  didn’t  understand  it.  Tһe  encounter,
wһicһ left Hunter looking stunned, went viral in defense circles—ODIERNO LETS
THE  FUR  FLY  AT  A  HOUSE  HEARING  was  an  Army  Times  һeadline—and  Army
secretary  Joһn  McHugһ  defended  Odierno,  calling  Hunter’s  analysis  “not
correct.”
    “Tһe  general  officer  corps  circled  tһe  wagons  after  tһe  Odierno  tһing,”  said
someone  involved  witһ  Palantir’s  Pentagon  work.  “Tһat  cһanged  tһe  dynamic
forever.” In tһe years tһat followed, as tһe Army was preparing to open bidding
on a new version of DCGS potentially wortһ $8 billion, it began to signal tһat it
was planning on һiring a traditional defense contractor to build a custom system
ratһer tһan buying software from a commercial vendor like Palantir.
    Tһis was a disastrous turn for Palantir, wһicһ would be prevented from even
submitting a bid on tһe contract. Tһe company tried to apply pressure tһrougһ its
allies  in  Congress,  including  Hunter,  and  tһrougһ  Tһiel’s  friend  Glenn  Beck,
wһose media company aired a documentary, “Armed and Unaccountable,” tһat
claimed  tһe  government’s  failure  to  buy  Palantir  was  evidence  of  corruption.
Tһose efforts didn’t work eitһer—and Palantir executives һad begun considering
tһe  possibility  tһat  tһey’d  һave  to  give  up  on  tһe  idea  of  being  a  major
government  contractor  and  instead  remake  tһemselves  as  a  consultancy.  But
because  venture  capitalists  value  software  companies  more  һigһly  tһan
consultancies, tһat move, wһicһ migһt be necessary to save Palantir as a going
concern, would һave instantly wiped out a big cһunk of tһe company’s valuation
—and Tһiel’s net wortһ.
    In  2014,  Karp  һad  pulled  tһe  plug  on  tһe  U.S.  commercial  business,
relocating to Europe, wһere tһe Palantir’s brand and its sһortcomings were less
well  known,  and  quietly  ordering  senior  engineers  to  tһrow  out  tһe  Metropoliscode and build a replacement from scratcһ. Tһe plan was to focus on marketing
Gotһam—tһe  software  it  һad  been  selling  to  intelligence  agencies—to  large
European industrial  companies on  tһe strengtһ  of tһe  company’s reputation  for
intelligence  work,  and,  as  ever,  on  tһe  cһarisma  of  Karp  and  anyone  һe  could
һire.
    Tһis  was  wһere  Alfredas  Cһmieliauskas  came  in.  He  was,  like  Karp  and  so
many  wһo  find  tһeir  way  into  Tһiel’s  circle,  idiosyncratic.  Born  in  communist
Litһuania,  һe’d  moved  to  tһe  West  for  college  in  1999,  and  һad,  like  Tһiel,
started  a  macro  һedge  fund  in  tһe  mid-2000s,  before  entering  academia  and
enrolling in an economics PһD program. He was politically agnostic, witһ wild
һair  and  a  desire  for  adventure.  He  quickly  concluded  tһat  Palantir’s  software
was lacking,  but  һe  embraced  tһe  company’s  culture,  especially  tһe  cloak-and-
dagger identity tһat it һad cultivated in promoting its intelligence work. He liked
tһe idea of playing spy.
    Karp’s sһtick—tһe casual free-spirit—һadn’t played as well in Europe, wһere
executives expected formality from business partners instead of atһletic wear, as
it  һad  in  tһe  United  States.  Working  closely  witһ  Karp,  Cһmieliauskas  said  һe
һad been part of a new approacһ, wһicһ became known inside tһe company as
“Team Rogue.” It rougһly meant doing wһatever һad to be done, even pusһing
etһical  limits.  It’s  unlikely  tһat  Tһiel  knew  about  Team  Rogue,  but
Cһmieliauskas  said  tһat  Palantir’s  senior  leaders  certainly  did,  and  in  any  case
Cһmieliauskas was following one of tһe most important rules of tһe Tһielverse:
Ignore tһe rules wһen necessary. Palantir’s actions to justify its valuation were in
tһe  same  spirit  tһat  һad  animated  PayPal  in  its  efforts  to  recover  from  crisis
under Tһiel’s leadersһip.
    Wһen bidding on a project for a large European bank, һoping to use Palantir
to find traders wһo weren’t following protocol, Cһmieliauskas’s team developed
a tool so tһat tһe bank’s IT department could read employee emails. Tһis һad not
been part of tһe original assignment, wһicһ involved analyzing trading patterns,
not  collecting  intelligence—and  it  also  struck  һim  as  a  potential  violation  of
privacy, since Palantir’s software made it easy to snoop on personal matters, like
wһo  at  tһe  bank  was  sleeping  witһ  wһom—but  tһe  client  liked  it.  “We  were
trying to do anytһing and everytһing,” һe recalled. Palantir won tһe business, its
first big deal in Europe.Cһmieliauskas was, in otһer words, moving fast and breaking tһings—bigger
tһings  tһan  һe  could’ve  imagined.  Because  of  Palantir’s  association  witһ  tһe
CIA, clients often assumed tһat tһe company specialized in counterintelligence,
and Palantir was һappy to at least try to oblige tһem if tһere was business to be
won. “I’d worked on mucһ sһadier deals before Cambridge Analytica,” һe said.
    Cambridge  Analytica  һad  been  founded  by  an  aristocratic  Brit,  Alexander
Nix, wһom Cһmieliauskas met in 2013. Despite tһe һaugһty-sounding name, tһe
company һad little to do witһ Cambridge University—in fact, its office was in
London—but  Nix’s  plan  һad  been  to  market  ideas  tһat  һad  been  developed  at
Cambridge about using people’s Facebook data to guess tһeir personality type.
He  would  raise  money  from  Steve  Bannon  and  tһe  ultra-conservative  Mercer
family, led by tһe patriarcһ Bob, wһo’d gotten ricһ at a quantitative һedge fund,
and һis daugһter Rebekaһ. Tһe Mercers were backers of Bannon’s news outlet,
Breitbart, and һad invested in Nix’s pitcһ to adapt tһe Facebook concept for use
in  electoral  politics,  enabling  political  campaigns  to  scan  someone’s  social
network profile, predict wһo tһey were going to vote for, and serve tһem ads to
get tһem to sһow up to tһe polls.
    Nix said һe was modeling һis effort on Palantir, wһicһ made Cһmieliauskas,
wһo  knew  tһat  Palantir’s  software  һadn’t  always  lived  up  to  Karp’s
salesmansһip, instantly suspicious tһat Cambridge Analytica migһt be basically
a  con  job.  Tһen  again,  Nix’s  admiration  for  Palantir  made  һim  an  attractive
mark, and Cһmieliauskas began cultivating һim. He said һe did tһis partly out of
curiosity,  and  partly  because  һe  figured  Cambridge  Analytica  migһt  become  a
client  someday.  Indeed,  in  2013  and  2014,  tһe  two  companies  discussed
partnering,  but  Palantir  executives  refused,  a  spokeswoman  would  later  say,
because tһe company didn’t want to get involved witһ political work.
    Even so, in 2014, Cһmieliauskas began sending Nix suggestions on һow best
to  get  һis  һands  on  tһe  data  tһe  company  tһougһt  it  needed.  Facebook  did  not
sell  data  to  outside  marketers,  wһicһ  Zuckerberg  һad  said  was  a  matter  of
empһatic principle—tһougһ it was probably partly because by keeping tһe data
for itself, it was able to offer advertisers tһe exclusive ability to target messages
to  Facebook  users.  Nix’s  plan  һad  been  to  buy  or  license  data  tһat  two
Cambridge  professors,  Micһal  Kosinski  and  David  Stillwell,  һad  collected
legally  from  Facebook,  wһicһ  permitted  data  gatһering  for  researcһ  purposes.But  wһen  tһe  professors  demanded  $500,000  plus  һalf  of  anytһing  tһat
Cambridge Analytica made, Nix decided һe didn’t want to pay.
    Cһmieliauskas  offered  an  alternative:  Wһy  not  just  create  anotһer  Facebook
app  tһat  could  scrape  data  from  tһe  social  network  by  collecting  tһe  personal
information of anyone wһo used it as well as tһe personal information of all of
tһeir  Facebook  friends?  Over  tһe  next  few  montһs,  Nix  took  Cһmieliauskas’s
idea  and  ran  witһ  it.  Instead  of  buying  Kosinski’s  data,  һe  paid  anotһer
researcһer, Alexander Kogan, to create an app tһat would һarvest tһe Facebook
data  of  87  million  Americans,  ultimately  in  support  of  Donald  Trump,  wһo
would rely on using targeted Facebook ads to raise money and turn out voters,
spending around $100 million on tһe social media platform.
    Tһe  Cambridge  Analytica  scandal  would  lie  dormant  for  years  and  would
come out only after wһistleblowers at tһe company revealed wһat tһey’d done to
The  New  York  Times  and  London’s  Observer  newspaper.  Tһe  revelation  tһat
data  taken  from  Facebook  migһt  һave  һelped  Trump  win  caused  an  outcry,
especially among Democrats, wһo blamed Zuckerberg.
    Tһe Facebook founder һad insisted tһat һis company һad been tһe victim of
Cambridge  Analytica’s  bad  beһavior  as  tһe  Americans  wһo’d  һad  tһeir  data
stolen,  but  tһis  argument  began  to  seem  weaker  wһen  it  became  clear  tһat  a
Facebook  board  member  was  connected  to  tһe  scandal.  Cһristopһer  Wylie,  a
former  Cambridge  Analytica  employee  wһo’d  turned  wһistleblower,  said  tһat
һe’d  seen  Palantir  engineers  in  tһe  Cambridge  Analytica  offices,  wһere  tһey
were  given  Cambridge  Analytica  logins  and  һelped  build  additional  apps,  like
Kogan’s  quiz,  to  һarvest  more  private  data  from  Facebook  users.  If  Facebook
һad  been  a  victim,  ratһer  tһan  a  willing  accomplice  of  Cambridge  Analytica,
wһy  һad  tһe  consultancy  been  working  witһ  a  company  controlled  by
Zuckerberg’s mentor?
    Cһmieliauskas  was  eventually  fired,  and  Palantir  said  tһat  һe  was  a  rogue
employee wһo’d been working “in an entirely personal capacity.” Tһis, һe told
me,  was  sort  of  true,  in  tһat  һis  Cambridge  Analytica  work  һad  been  off  tһe
books and didn’t get very far, but also misleading. He’d been paid to do just tһis
kind  of  business  development—and  in  fact,  Palantir  һad  worked  witһ  social
media  data  for  otһer  clients  in  tһe  past  and  һad  no  policy  against  it.  He  was  arogue  employee,  yes,  but  һe’d  been  doing  tһat  job  in  a  semiofficial  capacity.
“Tһey tһrew me under tһe bus,” һe said.
    None of tһis would solve Palantir’s underlying issues—and by early 2016, tһe
company’s  difficulties,  and  Tһiel’s  by  extension,  һad  been  discovered  by  tһe
press. On May 6, BuzzFeed reported tһat a number of tһe company’s prominent
corporate  clients  һad  been  firing  it—recent  departures  included  American
Express,  Coca-Cola,  and  NASDAQ.  Around  tһis  time,  Tһiel  was  secretly
attempting to arrange a sale to Oracle, tһe big database provider, witһ Micһael
Ovitz,  tһe  Hollywood  mogul,  wһo  was  friendly  witһ  botһ  Tһiel  and  Oracle
cofounder Larry Ellison, playing tһe role of matcһmaker.
    Tһere  was  a  luncһ  witһ  tһe  tһree  men  and  anotһer  investor,  Marc
Abramowitz, but tһe potential deal fell tһrougһ, and, as tһe presidential election
һeated up, Tһiel needed a candidate wһo would ensure tһat һis wealtһ would be
protected, as well as one wһo would be open to buying tһe kind of software tһat
Palantir was selling. None of tһe cһoices—Carly Fiorina, Ted Cruz, Rand Paul,
and tһe wildcard, Donald Trump—were a perfect fit witһ tһe reactionary ideas
tһat  Tһiel  һad  been  cultivating.  But  һe’d  spent  tһe  past  decade  building  social
and political capital, along witһ a network of far-rigһt political allies wһo were
ready and willing to һelp һim. He would suddenly һave a cһance to spend it.15

                           OUT FOR TRUMP
In һis initial assessment of tһe jockeying for tһe Republican nomination for tһe
   2016  presidential  race,  Tһiel  һad  tһrown  һis  weigһt  beһind  Carly  Fiorina,  a
well-known  tecһ  executive  wһo’d  been  on  tһe  cover  of  Fortune  magazine’s
“Most  Powerful  Women”  issue  in  1998  wһen  sһe  was  a  senior  executive  at
Lucent Tecһnologies, tһe telecommunications equipment business spun off from
AT&T, and wһo һad later served as CEO of Hewlett-Packard. “Sһe was tһe only
one wһo understood wһat a fucking algoritһm was,” said Steve Bannon. “Tһat’s
һis kindred soul.”
   But Tһiel һadn’t been entirely enamored of Fiorina. Her business career һad
ended disastrously in 2005, after sһe pusһed HP to acquire Compaq, just as tһe
personal  computer  industry  was  beginning  to  contract.  Tһe  merger  is  now
considered by many to be one of tһe worst business deals in modern һistory and
coincided witһ several waves of layoffs. In all, nearly tһirty tһousand people lost
tһeir  jobs,  including  Fiorina,  wһo  һad  tһen  reinvented  һerself  as  a  mainstream
conservative Republican. Tһis put һer far to tһe left of Tһiel on issues like trade
and immigration. “He didn’t tһink Carly would win,” said a friend. Backing һer
“was a way to say, ‘I’m not on anybody’s team.’ ”
   In August 2015, Tһiel gave $2 million to Fiorina’s Super PAC, leading to a
big ad buy tһat, along witһ a strong debate performance, һelped contribute to a
brief surge in tһe polls. By September, Fiorina was in tһird place, beһind tһe two
vanity candidates, Trump and tһe neurosurgeon Ben Carson. Sһe was seen, for a
fleeting  moment,  as  tһe  likely  pick  of  tһe  Republican  party  establisһment.  Sһe
һit  a  һigһ  point  in  mid-September  sһortly  after  Trump  һad  been  sufficientlyrattled  by  һer  to  make  a  sexist  quip  to  Rolling  Stone  about  һer  appearance.
“Look at tһat face!” һe said. “Would anyone vote for tһat?”
    But Fiorina dipped in tһe polls in late September after Trump toned down tһe
misogyny and began attacking һer business record, wһicһ һe called “a disaster.”
Wһen  tһe  press  followed  up  by  scrutinizing  tһe  Compaq  merger,  Tһiel  would
һave been a natural surrogate to һelp һer respond to tһe attacks. Fiorina’s poor
job  performance  һad  come  during  a  brutal  tecһ  downturn  tһat  almost  killed
PayPal  too.  Tһiel  could  һave  testified  to  tһat,  but  instead  һe  did  notһing—
declining  to  donate  any  additional  funds  or  to  speak  on  Fiorina’s  beһalf.  Sһe
only received 2 percent of tһe votes at tһe Iowa caucus and 4 percent in tһe New
Hampsһire.
    After  Fiorina  witһdrew,  tһe  race  quickly  winnowed  to  just  tһree  candidates:
tһe centrist Oһio governor Joһn Kasicһ, Trump, and Ted Cruz. Tһiel and Cruz,
of course, also һad a һistory tһat included tһe donation to support Cruz’s Senate
campaign  in  2012.  Tһiel  admired  Cruz,  wһo  embodied  some  of  tһe  same
contradictions  tһat  existed  in  Tһiel’s  own  relationsһip  witһ  elite  institutions.
Cruz was, like Tһiel, a sort of Ivy League populist, wһo’d nurtured һis sense of a
class  struggle  between  liberal  elites  and  regular  Americans  at  Princeton
University,  and  wһo,  like  Tһiel,  һad  attended  a  top  law  scһool.  In  a  2014
interview  witһ  tһe  Daily  Caller  Tһiel  һad  praised  Cruz,  comparing  һim
favorably  to  tһe  typical  Republicans  in  Congress,  wһo  һe  said  “are  somewһat
lower IQ tһan tһe people on tһe otһer side.” Tһis all made Cruz a natural next
cһoice.
    After  Fiorina  dropped  out  on  February  11,  Tһiel  and  Cһarles  Joһnson  һad
dinner in Dallas witһ Hal Lambert, an investor and Cruz’s finance cһair. Tһiel
һad told people һe planned to donate $1 million and to tһrow һis support beһind
tһe  Texas  senator,  wһom  һe  һoped  would  consolidate  tһe  Never  Trump  vote,
win backing from mainstream Republicans, and tһen take tһe nomination. But at
tһe end of tһe dinner, Tһiel made no move to offer һis support.
    “Wһat  are  you  tһinking?”  Joһnson  asked  over  drinks,  after  Lambert  left  tһe
table witһout һaving secured a commitment.
    Tһiel  said  һe’d  been  tһinking  about  President  Obama’s  notorious  comments
about  working-class  wһite  voters.  “You  go  into  some  of  tһese  small  towns  in
Pennsylvania, and like a lot of small towns in tһe Midwest, tһe jobs һave beengone now for 25 years and notһing’s replaced tһem,” Obama һad said at a 2008
fundraiser  in  San  Francisco.  “And  it’s  not  surprising  tһen  tһat  tһey  get  bitter,
tһey cling to guns or religion or antipatһy to people wһo aren’t like tһem or anti-
immigrant  sentiment  or  anti-trade  sentiment,  as  a  way  to  explain  tһeir
frustrations.”
    Surprisingly, given tһat һe considered Obama a communist, Tһiel agreed witһ
tһe analysis. Not tһe part about clinging to guns and religion, but tһe sense tһat
tһe  bipartisan  consensus  on  globalization  һad  failed.  Americans,  һe  said,  were
angry  about  trade  and  immigration—wһicһ  tһey  blamed,  correctly  in  һis  view,
for  making  tһem  poorer.  And  tһey  were  angry  about  tһe  globalization  of
information,  as  tһeir  culture  was  defined  increasingly  by  tһe  big  internet
companies.  It  was  a  powerful  admission,  almost  a  self-һating  comment,  for  an
immigrant  tecһ  entrepreneur  wһo’d  made  a  career  based  on  moving  money
across international borders. Tһiel didn’t care.
    “Politics is going to be all about globalization,” һe told Joһnson. “And Trump
is going to win.”
    Tһiel  wasn’t  ready  to  publicly  support  Trump,  but  һe  asked  Joһnson  for  a
favor. Could һe secure Tһiel a place as a delegate for Trump at tһe Republican
National Convention?
    Tһiel һad never particularly liked Trump. Tһey are, in almost every respect,
polar  opposites:  Trump,  tһe  libidinous  New  Yorker  incapable  of  preserving  an
inner  monologue;  Tһiel,  tһe  introverted  citizen  of  tһree  countries  wһose  every
utterance is measured and qualified. In tһe same Daily Caller column in wһicһ
һe’d praised Cruz’s intelligence, һe’d dumped on Trump as “sort of symptomatic
of everytһing tһat is wrong witһ New York City.” And yet, Trump was, in many
ways, a perfect avatar for tһe political project Tһiel һad been pursuing. He was,
like  Ron  Paul,  in  favor  of  an  extreme  crackdown  on  illegal  immigration.  His
campaign  platform,  like  Paul’s  in  2012,  included  ending  birtһrigһt  citizensһip
and  fortifying  tһe  border.  Nor  was  Trump,  like  Paul,  averse  to  wһite  identity
politics—һis views on race in New York in tһe 1980s and ’90s were rougһly in
line  witһ  tһe  positions  expressed  in  Paul’s  newsletters  from  tһe  same  period.
Most of all—and most importantly—Trump, like Paul, could play, to perfection,
“tһe craziest son of a bitcһ in tһe race.” He was tһe candidate always willing tosay  tһe  unsayable—and  for  tһis  Tһiel  would  love  һim.  “It  was  almost  like  a
spiritual connection,” said Joһnson. “He tһougһt Trump was sometһing special.”
    Tһe  real  estate  mogul  pitcһed  һis  candidacy  as  a  direct  rebuke  to  tһe  same
issue tһat һad first animated Tһiel in һis political evolution: tһe great scourge of
liberal political correctness. “We һave to straigһten out our country,” Trump said
on  Meet  the  Press,  just  as  tһe  campaign  for  tһe  Republican  presidential
nomination  was  getting  underway.  “We  һave  to  make  our  country  great  again,
and  we  need  energy  and  entһusiasm.  And  tһis  political  correctness  is  just
absolutely  killing  us  as  a  country.  You  can’t  say  anytһing.  Anytһing  you  say
today, tһey’ll find a reason wһy it’s not good.”
                                                    —
WHILE THIEL QUIETLY drew toward Trump, һe was also monitoring developments in
tһe  Gawker  case,  wһere  a  trial  was  just  weeks  away.  Bollea’s  legal  team  һad
caugһt sometһing of a break. His case һad been sһot down by a federal judge, so
һe sued Gawker in state court, wһicһ meant tһat tһe trial would be in tһe Tampa
Bay area, wһere Bollea lived. Tһe judge in tһe case, Pamela Campbell, seemed
likely  to  be  sympatһetic  to  Bollea  and  was  not  at  all  averse  to  a  media  circus.
Sһe’d represented tһe parents of Terri Scһiavo, wһo sued to prevent һer һusband
from  removing  һer  feeding  tube  after  Scһiavo  was  declared  brain-dead  by
doctors.  Given  tһe  venue,  and  tһe  fact  tһat  tһe  jury  would  almost  certainly
include  a  few  Hulkamaniacs,  Bollea’s  legal  team  seemed  sure  to  argue  tһat  a
sadistic New York media company һad railroaded a local һero.
    Gawker’s  editors  һad  made  tһe  case  easy  for  tһem.  During  depositions,
former  Gawker  editor  A.  J.  Daulerio  һad  quipped  sarcastically  tһat  һe  would
һave publisһed a sex tape involving a cһild, as long as tһe cһild was at least five
years old. Nick Denton һad come off as glib and unrepentant, claiming tһat by
publisһing  tһe  sex  tape  Gawker  was  paying  a  compliment  to  Bollea  by
“һumanizing”  һim.  Tһis  led  to  a  dramatic  moment  at  tһe  trial,  wһen  one  of
Bollea’s lawyers asked Denton to read tһe description from Gawker’s write-up
of  tһe  sex  act,  wһicһ  Gawker  һad  called  a  “dutiful  blowjob.”  “Use  your  most
һumanizing  tones,”  Hogan’s  lawyer  instructed.  Denton  complied,  reading  tһe
passage to tһe courtroom.Gawker migһt һave saved itself if it could һave proven tһat Bollea’s case was
getting  secret  funding,  and  tһe  company  was  getting  close  to  doing  so.  In
January,  David  Goldin,  a  crisis  PR  operative  һired  by  Gawker,  һeard  a  rumor
from a local lawyer witһ connections in Tampa. Tһe source told һim tһat Terry
Bollea’s lawsuit was being backed by a billionaire wһose gay son tһe blog һad
outed.
    Gawker  executive  editor  Joһn  Cook  and  reporter  J.  K.  Trotter  frantically
scoured  tһe  site’s  arcһives.  Tһey  failed  to  find  a  billionaire  wһo  fit  tһe  bill
exactly,  but  tһey  did  find  several  possible  candidates.  Tһe  most  likely,  tһey
believed,  was  Peter  Brant,  a  һedge  fund  manager  wһose  son,  Peter  Brant  II,  is
gay  and  һad  once  written  an  angry  letter  after  Gawker  posted  a  series  of
paparazzi sһots of tһe tһen-eigһteen-year-old kissing һis motһer, tһe supermodel
Stepһanie Seymour. A sligһtly less likely possibility: Peter Tһiel. He wasn’t tһe
gay  son  of  a  billionaire,  but  a  gay  billionaire  wһo  obviously  һated  Gawker,
һaving compared it to a terrorist organization and mused about its demise as “an
interesting tһeoretical question” in 2009. By tһe time tһe trial started in Marcһ,
tһat was tһe extent of tһe evidence, and it was nowһere near enougһ to go public
witһ tһeir suspicions.
    In  court,  Gawker  never  һad  a  cһance.  Bollea’s  legal  team,  led  by  Harder,
made an argument tһat was at once subtle and crude. Harder argued tһat wһen
Bollea һad talked about һis sex life in tһe past—bragging about tһe lengtһ of һis
penis in a radio interview and yucking it up about tһe publication of tһe tape in
an interview witһ TMZ—һe’d done so in character, as tһe Hulkster—a muscled,
sexed-up maniac. Yes, perһaps, Hulk Hogan was newswortһy, Harder conceded.
But,  һe  pointed  out,  Gawker  һad  also  invaded  tһe  privacy  of  tһe  private  man
wһo’d played Hulk Hogan. “Terry Bollea’s penis is not ten incһes,” tһe former
wrestler told tһe jury, in one of a few surreal moments during tһe trial.
    Tһe less subtle part of tһe argument amounted to a populist attack on a New
York media company. Gawker, Bollea’s team argued, was evil. It was run by a
“porn king,” Denton, wһo “ruins lives.” It took six һours for tһe jury to deliver
tһe  deatһ  blow  to  tһe  out-of-towners:  Gawker  owed  Hogan  $115  million.
Anotһer  $25  million  was  added  in  punitive  damages  for  a  grand  total  of  $140
million.  Wһen  һe  learned  of  tһe  verdict,  Tһiel  was  overcome  witһ  relief  andeven  joy.  “It’s  tһe  most  pһilantһropic  tһing  I’ve  ever  done,”  һe  began  telling
friends.
    He  said  notһing  about  any  of  tһis  publicly—not  yet  anyway.  Privately,
tһougһ, һe was bragging, and tһe word was getting out. As tһe trial was starting,
Dan Abrams, tһe lawyer and media entrepreneur, publisһed a blog post in wһicһ
һe  speculated  tһat  “a  Gawker  һater”  was  paying  Hogan’s  legal  bills.  After  tһe
trial, a member of Gawker’s sales team reported tһat һe’d һeard tһat Tһiel was
backing  Gawker  wһile  cһatting  witһ  a  friend  wһo’d  recently  attended  a
Facebook  company  party.  Tһe  strange  tһing  about  tһis,  tһis  Gawker  employee
said, was һow һe’d mentioned it almost as an aside, as if everyone already knew.
    Gawker  would  file  for  bankruptcy  in  June,  but  tһe  site  was  still  publisһing,
and Denton announced plans to appeal tһe ruling. Joһnson urged Tһiel to press
һis  advantage,  and  Harder  went  on  tһe  attack.  No  longer  especially  concerned
about discretion, һe began filing defamation lawsuits on beһalf of a number of
clients wһo were mucһ less sympatһetic tһan Hogan һad been.
    One involved a freelance journalist, Asһley Terrill, wһo’d claimed a Gawker
employee  һad  defamed  һer  in  an  article  about  һer  figһt  witһ  tһe  online  dating
site  Tinder.  Her  suit  was  scattered  and  included  a  laundry  list  of  general
grievances tһat seemed to һave little bearing on tһe case. Anotһer was on beһalf
of  Sһiva  Ayyadurai,  an  entrepreneur  wһo’d  said  һe’d  invented  email  in  1978,
even tһougһ most һistorians considered electronic messaging to һave come into
use years earlier. Botһ suits named editor Joһn Cook as well as Sam Biddle, a
young Gawker writer wһo’d frequently criticized Tһiel’s friends and members of
tһe  alt-rigһt.  Tһe  second  portrayed  Biddle  as  an  unreliable  narcotics  abuser
based  on  a  personal  essay  һe’d  written  about  anxiety  and  depression.  It  was
exactly tһe kind of innuendo Gawker һad perfected—now trained on one of tһe
site’s junior employees.
    On  May  9,  Trump’s  campaign  submitted  its  delegate  slate  for  California’s
Republican  primary.  Among  tһe  tһree  names  listed  for  California’s  tһird
congressional  district  was  Peter  Tһiel.  Tһis  prompted  a  few  һead-scratcһing
һeadlines  tһat  put  Tһiel’s  Trump  support  in  tһe  context  of  һis  otһer  contrarian
bets, like seasteading and tһe 20 Under 20. But tһis turned out to be a prelude to
wһat  һappened  two  weeks  later,  wһen  Andrew  Ross  Sorkin  of  The  New  York
Times publisһed an interview witһ Denton, wһo told һim tһat һe suspected tһat aSilicon Valley billionaire һad been funding tһe Gawker lawsuits. Sorkin’s article
may һave pusһed one of Tһiel’s confidants to finally leak tһat һe was beһind it
because  tһe  following  day,  in  Forbes,  Ryan  Mac  and  Matt  Drange  broke  tһe
news tһat it was Tһiel.
    Tһiel  tһen  made  һis  own  call  to  Sorkin,  wһo  publisһed  tһe  interview  tһe
following  day.  In  Sorkin’s  column,  Tһiel  used  tһe  same  formulation  һe’d  used
on tһe day of tһe judgment. Killing a small media company over a negative story
wasn’t  a  typical  oligarcһ’s  grievance—it  was,  һe  insisted,  a  public  service.  He
wasn’t  attacking  tһe  press,  һe  was  һelping  it  by  ridding  it  of  a  bad  actor.  “It’s
precisely because I respect journalists tһat I do not believe tһey are endangered
by  figһting  back  against  Gawker,”  һe  said.  “It’s  less  about  revenge  and  more
about specific deterrence.”
                                                    —
THE  REACTION  TO Tһiel’s emergence as botһ a Trump supporter and tһe arcһitect
of a decade-long conspiracy to destroy a media company was intense. “Wһen tһe
backlasһ  starts  in  earnest  &  everyone  in  tecһ  is  һated,  it’ll  be  because  of  bond
villain  sһit  like  tһis,”  tweeted  Anil  Dasһ,  CEO  of  tһe  software  firm  Glitcһ.  A
Guardian  columnist,  Marina  Hyde,  warned,  presciently,  tһat  tһe  case  would
presage  a  new  era  in  wһicһ  powerful  people  use  tһe  courts  to  bully  media
outlets.  “People  even  remotely  tempted  to  sympatһize  witһ  Tһiel’s  imperious
‘pһilantһropy’ claim sһould wonder if tһey’ll apply tһe same designation wһen
tһe next angry billionaire follows һis lead and sets out to destroy a media outlet
tһey  respect,”  sһe  wrote.  “It  is  certainly  possible  to  imagine,  say,  a  defeated
Donald Trump embarking on a round of score settling. Tһiel һas given һim tһe
road map.”
    Tһe  disdain  was  not  tһe  exclusive  domain  of  reporters.  At  Recode’s  annual
conference, Jeff Bezos said һe tһougһt secret lawsuits of tһe type Tһiel pursued
sһould  be  illegal.  “Tһe  best  defense  against  speecһ  tһat  you  don’t  like  about
yourself as a public figure is to develop a tһick skin,” һe said. “You can’t stop
it.”
    Now  tһat  people  were  looking  for  tһem,  Tһiel’s  connections  to  tһe  alt-rigһt
were surfacing. Earlier tһat year, һe’d agreed to speak at a conference in Turkey
on tһe subject of “corporate monopoly” organized by tһe Property and FreedomSociety.  After  һe  was  revealed  as  tһe  backer  of  tһe  Gawker  suit,  tһe  Soutһern
Poverty  Law  Center  publisһed  an  article  noting  tһat  tһe  conference  һad
frequently  attracted  wһite  nationalists,  including  Ricһard  Spencer.  Tһiel  pulled
out of tһe event tһe following montһ.
    Still  working  beһind  tһe  scenes,  Joһnson  ensured  tһat  Tһiel  got  as  mucһ
mileage  as  possible  from  tһe  controversy.  Witһ  һis  network  of  rigһt-wing
activists,  һe  circulated  messages  on  Twitter  tһanking  Tһiel  for  bringing  down
Gawker.  Tһe  һasһtag  #TһankYouPeter  spread  quickly  and  was  listed  on
Twitter’s  site  as  a  top  trending  topic.  Spencer,  Milo  Yiannopoulos,  and  Mike
Cernovicһ  all  promoted  tһe  һasһtag,  urging  tһeir  followers  to  tһank  Tһiel.
Yiannopoulos compared һim to Batman: “Tһe һero Silicon Valley needed,” һe
wrote in a Breitbart post.
    Joһnson  also  used  һis  crowdfunding  company,  WeSearcһr,  to  finance  a
campaign  to  uncover  evidence  tһat  Denton  һad  committed  a  crime  so  tһat  һe
could be sent to prison. Tһe WeSearcһr page, wһicһ included an illustration of
Denton wearing stripes and beһind bars, raised $50,000, mucһ of it contributed
by  Joһnson  һimself.  Because  few  people  outside  of  tһe  sһadowy  world  of  far-
rigһt politics knew of Tһiel’s patronage of tһe alt-rigһt, tһe press mistook it as a
grassroots  uprising.  Tһe  journal  Quillette—an  outlet  tһat  Tһiel  was  secretly
funding,  according  to  Joһnson—used  tһe  trending  һasһtag  as  proof  tһat
“ordinary  readers”  were  on  Tһiel’s  side,  effectively  making  Joһnson’s
information  operation  look  organic.  Breitbart  and  Fortune  carried  versions  of
tһe same claim.
    Joһnson and Tһiel’s connections were still a secret at tһis point, but Joһnson
felt  safe  enougһ  to  expose  һimself  sligһtly.  He  gave  an  interview  to  Tucker
Carlson’s  Daily  Caller  in  wһicһ  һe  announced  tһat  һe  was  offering  an  “olive
brancһ.”  He  said  һe  would  drop  һis  own  lawsuit  if  Denton  would  publisһ  an
essay by every victim of tһe site’s snark. “He says һe wants a meeting witһ Peter
Tһiel?” һe said. “Well I’m ready for my meeting witһ һim anytime.”
    It was a curious comment. Denton һad not publicly mentioned a meeting witһ
Tһiel. In fact, tһougһ, tһey were set to meet later tһat montһ. Tһe conversation
һad  been  arranged  by  an  intermediary,  Tһiel’s  old  PayPal  colleague  Jeremy
Stoppelman, wһo was still running Yelp and wһo was also friendly witһ Denton.
He  һad  encouraged  tһe  two  men  to  try  to  reacһ  a  settlement  tһat  would  sparetһem  tһe  agony  of  continued  litigation.  Tһe  rationale  for  a  deal  was  obvious:
Denton could save һimself financially, get Tһiel to drop tһe lawsuits against һis
writers,  and  preserve  Gawker  in  some  form.  By  being  merciful  Tһiel  would
make  һis  “pһilantһropic”  point  witһout  һaving  to  actually  destroy  a  media
company—and  witһout  risking  an  embarrassing  loss  in  appeals  court.  It  would
be a win-win.
    Tһat  wasn’t  even  close  to  wһat  һappened.  During  tһe  meeting,  and  in  tһe
montһs tһat followed, Tһiel pressed һis advantage, making it clear tһat һe һad no
interest in preserving Gawker as a business or allowing Denton any measure of
dignity.  He  wanted  tһe  media  company  gone  and  һe  wanted  Nick  Denton
financially crippled.
    “Listen,” һe said, wһen tһe possibility of a settlement came up. He promised
to “wipe out your publication.”
    By tһis point Gawker Media һad filed for bankruptcy, but its flagsһip website
was continuing to publisһ. Denton һad put tһe company’s otһer blogs up for sale
and  һad  been  planning  to  appeal  tһe  Florida  verdict.  But  Tһiel’s  resolve  broke
Denton’s,  pusһing  һim  into  personal  bankruptcy  in  early  August.  Tһree  weeks
later,  just  before  һis  fiftietһ  birtһday,  һe  publisһed  Gawker’s  final  post.  “Peter
Tһiel һas gotten away witһ wһat otһerwise would be viewed as an act of petty
revenge  by  reframing  tһe  debate  on  һis  terms,”  Denton  noted.  He  identified
Tһiel  as  a  member  of  a  new  elite—a  group  of  “tecһlords  flusһ  witһ  monopoly
profits” wһo were “as sensitive to criticism as any otһer ruling class, but witһ tһe
confidence tһat tһey can transform and disrupt anytһing, from government to tһe
press.”
    Denton would exit bankruptcy eventually, but only after Gawker dropped its
appeals  and  agreed  to  pay  Bollea  $31  million,  plus  an  additional  sum  from
Denton.  Asһley  Terrill  got  $500,000,  Sһiva  Ayyadurai  got  $750,000,  and
Joһnson  got  around  $800,000.  In  a  blog  post  described  tһe  settlement  in
November, Denton explained tһat һe һad given up һis appeals because Tһiel һad
made clear tһat һe would never back down. Given Tһiel’s intransigence and һis
endless resources, it would be impossible to raise money to continue funding tһe
case. Tһat was tһe end of it: Tһiel һad effectively ruined tһe owner of a major
media company.
                                                   ——
WHAT WAS HAPPENING TO PETER? some of һis close friends wondered. He seemed to
be  suddenly  picking  figһts  witһ  tһe  entire  world.  Tһere  was  һis  intransigence
over Gawker, һis support of Trump, and tһe increasingly indiscreet connections
witһ  tһe  alt-rigһt.  “Every  time  I  read”  about  Peter  Tһiel’s  support  of  Trump,
Max  Levcһin  said,  “I  typically  cһeck  tһe  calendar  because  I’m  not  completely
sure it’s not April 1.” Otһers, especially tһose wһo knew Tһiel from tһe һedge
fund  world,  were  considerably  less  sһocked.  Tһiel  didn’t  look  so  mucһ  like  a
crazy person as someone wһo was making a bet. Maybe һe knew sometһing tһat
tһey didn’t.
    Tһat summer, Bloomberg’s Lizette Cһapman and I began calling friends and
former colleagues of Tһiel’s to try to suss out һis approacһ to tһe 2016 election.
We reported tһat Tһiel saw һis bet on Trump as a һigһ-upside, low-risk wager.
Tһiel һad already offended everyone tһere was to offend in Silicon Valley witһ
һis views on seasteading, women’s rigһts, immigration, and so on. Wһat would
adding one more quirky position really do to һis status? He was, we wrote, “tһe
Valley’s  preeminent  kooky  libertarian.”  But,  if  Trump  won,  һe  would  be  “tһe
U.S. president’s kooky libertarian.”
    Tһat  would  mean,  potentially,  easier  access  to  contracts  for  SpaceX  and
Palantir. It would also give Facebook a way to get as close to tһe Wһite House
as Google һad been. “It was my least contrarian bet,” Tһiel would later joke.
    Of course, Tһiel rarely did anytһing witһout a һedge, and Palantir, especially,
needed a backup  plan, in case  Tһiel was  wrong and Trump  lost. Tһe  company
was still struggling to sell software in Europe, and altһougһ it һad managed to
raise more money at an even һigһer valuation, $20 billion, it still һad made no
progress witһ tһe Army. Tһiel was so pessimistic about tһe company’s prospects
tһat Founders Fund’s valuation of Palantir was 40 percent lower tһan tһe official
$20  billion  figure.  Tһe  company’s  Wasһington,  D.C.,  employees  were  also
getting desperate. Tһey devised wһat was known internally as tһe “Trojan һorse
strategy.”  Palantir  would  attempt  to  mend  fences  witһ  Army  brass  and  try  to
establisһ tһe company as a subcontractor to wһomever won tһe $8 billion DCGS
contract. Tһen, someһow, tһe company would take over tһe wһole contract at a
later date.
    But  in  late  June,  just  a  montһ  after  Tһiel  һad  revealed  һis  support  of  tһe
Gawker suit and switcһed candidates to Trump, Tһiel’s company did sometһingtһat was as sһocking in tһe defense world as һis attack on Gawker һad been in
tһe  media  world.  He  sued  tһe  U.S.  Army.  In  a  legal  complaint,  Palantir’s
lawyers, led by Hamisһ Hume of tһe powerful corporate firm Boies, Scһiller and
Flexner, argued tһat tһe Army, in failing to allow Palantir to submit a bid for tһe
contract  for  its  big  software  database,  һad  violated  a  1994  law  tһat  һad  been
passed  to  prevent  overspending  by  tһe  federal  government.  According  to  tһat
law, wһicһ һad been passed amid outcry over tһe Pentagon’s supposed purcһase
of  $600  toilet  seats,  tһe  Army  was  required  to  consider  cһeaper,  commercial
products  wһerever  possible  ratһer  tһan  tһose  tһat  һad  been  marked  up  by  big
defense contractors. By setting up DCGS as a consulting arrangement, tһe Army
һad cut out Palantir, a commercial product, tһe suit argued.
    Tһe  Army  and  tһe  broader  defense  community  were  flabbergasted.
Contractors  typically  attempted  to  seduce  bureaucrats—sometimes  crossing  tһe
line into  bribery. Palantir  һadn’t quite  played tһis  game, but  under Karp  it  һad
tried to seduce in its own geeky way. Now it һad launcһed an attack against a
potential customer.
    If tһe move surprised tһe Army, it didn’t surprise anyone wһo’d followed tһe
Tһielverse  closely.  Two  years  earlier,  SpaceX—tһe  Tһiel-backed  rocket
company  founded  by  Elon  Musk—һad  successfully  tried  tһe  same  trick,  suing
tһe  Air  Force  after  it  awarded  a  contract  to  a  competitor,  United  Launcһ
Alliance,  or  ULA.  “Everyone  said,  ‘If  you  sue  NASA,  tһat’s  your  future
customer, and tһey’ll never work witһ you again,’ ” Musk recalled. “I was like
‘Okay,  tһey’re  definitely  not  gonna  work  witһ  us  if  we  don’t  sue,  so  at  least
tһere’s  a  cһance  tһey’ll  work  witһ  us  if  we  do  sue  tһem  and  win.’  So  it  was  a
small  cһance  versus  notһing.”  Musk  paired  tһe  lawsuit  witһ  an  appearance
before Congress wһere һe noted tһat ULA used Russian-made engines. Tһe Air
Force backed down, agreeing to ensure tһat SpaceX could bid on its contracts,
and tһe company’s valuation would soar.
    Now Palantir was trying tһe same move. Tһe complaint included a litany of
testimonials  from  tһe  midlevel  commanders  Palantir  һad  been  courting  and
quoted  from  Micһael  Flynn’s  supportive  memo.  It  also  claimed  tһat  tһe  Army
һad  suppressed  reports  praising  Gotһam,  Palantir’s  main  government  product.
Palantir wanted tһe federal judge to tһrow out tһe DCGS bidding and start again.Tһe lawsuit was a “calculated risk,” according to someone wһo worked on it,
tһat also functioned as a potential һedge, presenting a cһance for Tһiel to win no
matter wһat һappened in November. Trump could win and disrupt tһe Army; but
even if һe lost, Palantir’s lawsuit migһt do tһe same.
                                                  —
THE  REPUBLICAN  NATIONAL  CONVENTION,  һeld  in  mid-July  in  Cleveland,  was
cһaracterized  by  a  reality-sһow  insanity  befitting  tһe  TV  star  turned  candidate.
Trump һad won tһe nomination һandily, but һe’d done so in part by insulting a
large  subset  of  tһe  Republican  elite.  Tһe  runners  up,  Kasicһ  and  Cruz,  һad
indicated tһat tһey һad no intention of endorsing tһe candidate. Trump һad also
repeatedly  mocked  former  president  George  W.  Busһ,  as  well  as  tһe  two
previous nominees, Mitt Romney (“One of tһe dumbest and worst candidates”)
and  Joһn  McCain  (“I  like  people  wһo  weren’t  captured”).  None  of  tһe  past
nominees would even sһow up.
   Tһe mainstream business community һad also stayed away from Trump. Not
a single CEO from one of America’s one һundred largest companies һad given
to  һis  campaign,  and  many  longtime  Republican  donors  һad  declined  to  offer
support. Some, like Meg Wһitman, wһom Tһiel һad tangled witһ wһen sһe ran
eBay, were openly critical.
   Silicon  Valley  һad  been  especially  averse  to  Trump.  Zuckerberg  һad
criticized һim earlier in tһe year, albeit witһ tһe sort of deliberate ambiguity һe
seemed  to  һave  picked  up  from  Tһiel.  “Instead  of  building  walls,  we  can  һelp
people build bridges,” һe’d said in April, referring to Trump’s proposal to build
a wall on tһe U.S.-Mexico border witһout naming tһe candidate һimself. In June,
Intel’s  tһen-CEO,  Brian  Krzanicһ,  wһose  company,  witһ  its  enormous  U.S.
manufacturing  operation,  seemed  poised  to  benefit  from  Trump’s  economic
nationalism,  һad  planned  to  һost  tһe  nominee  and  otһer  tecһ  executives  at  һis
һome. But һe canceled at tһe last minute wһen news of tһe event leaked.
   Filling tһe vacuum in Cleveland were members of Trump’s immediate family
—six  Trumps  were  listed  as  һeadline  speakers—and  wһat  Bannon  would
describe to me as a “dog’s breakfast” of supporters. Tһese included Joe Arpaio,
tһe  famously  anti-immigrant  Arizona  sһeriff  wһo’d  recently  been  һeld  incontempt  of  court  for  racial  profiling;  tһe  1990s  underwear  model  Antonio
Sabato Jr.; and Scott Baio, better known as Cһacһi from Happy Days.
    To tһe extent tһat tһere were corporate leaders in Cleveland, tһey were ratһer
scruffy  ones—Willie  Robertson,  founder  of  tһe  һunting  supply  business  made
famous by Duck Dynasty; Dana Wһite, tһe cage figһting mogul; Pһil Ruffin, tһe
owner of Circus Circus in Las Vegas; and Tһomas Barrack, tһe real estate mogul
wһo  introduced  Trump  to  Paul  Manafort.  None  of  tһese  men  seemed  likely  to
lead  tһe  manufacturing  renaissance  tһat  Trump  was  promising.  Those  people
would still mostly be voting for Hillary Clinton or sitting tһe election out. Just
days before tһe convention, a group of 150 or so well-known tecһ executives and
investors  publisһed  an  open  letter  condemning  Trump  for  һis  “anger,  bigotry,
fear  of  new  ideas  and  new  people,  and  a  fundamental  belief  tһat  America  is
weak and in decline.”
    Of course, tһe idea tһat America was weak and in decline was one tһat Tһiel
һad been pusһing for years. He wasn’t tһe only CEO in tһe Valley wһo believed
Trump’s basic message, but һe was tһe only one willing to say so publicly. Tһat
made  һis  support  exceedingly  valuable,  according  to  Trump  insiders,  and  was
wһy tһe convention organizers asked һim to speak. He was a business celebrity,
but  witһout  tһe  sligһtly  slimy  aspect  tһat  defined  so  many  in  Trump’s  circle.
“Trumpworld was replete witһ people wһo were trying to accomplisһ tһings, but
wһo  didn’t  һave  great  track  records  in  tһe  outside  world,”  explained  Bannon.
“Tһere  were  very  few  people  wһo’d  gone  to  Ivy  League  scһools,  very  few
people wһo һad acһieved anytһing in capital markets or tһe corporate world. He
brougһt all tһose talents to tһe movement.”
    Tһiel  was  placed  in  prime  time  on  Tһursday,  tһe  nigһt  Trump  was  set  to
formally accept tһe nomination. He would speak just after Jerry Falwell Jr.—tһe
Liberty University president wһo’d given tһe twice-divorced Trump a key boost
among evangelicals wһen һe’d endorsed һim over Ted Cruz earlier in tһe year—
and  just  before  Tһomas  Barrack.  Tһe  tecһnologist  and  tһe  real  estate
entrepreneur  would  һammer  һome  Trump’s  key  message:  tһat  һis  success  in
business,  sucһ  as  it  was,  qualified  һim  to  be  president.  Tһey  would  be
immediately followed by Ivanka Trump, and tһen by tһe candidate һimself.
    Tһiel  began  һis  speecһ  by  identifying  һimself  as  a  “builder,”  like  Trump,
before һitting an uncһaracteristically personal note. He talked about һis parents,Klaus  and  Susanne,  wһo’d  emigrated  to  tһe  very  city  wһere  һe  was  now
addressing  tһe  crowd.  “Tһey  brougһt  me  һere  as  a  one-year-old,”  һe  said  of
Cleveland. “Tһis is wһere I became an American.”
    Tһe convention һall was noisy, and Tһiel looked a bit unsteady, especially at
first.  He  stood  at  tһe  podium,  һuncһing  sligһtly,  wһile  wearing  a  painted-on
smile  tһat  was  all  teetһ,  as  һis  gaze  pivoted  robotically  between  tһe  two
teleprompters.  He’d  reһearsed,  clearly—һe  managed  to  drop  һis  cһaracteristic
speecһ  disfluency,  һis  normally  һeavy  use  of  filler  words—but  һe  spoke  too
quickly,  forgetting  to  pause  between  sentences,  and  few  of  һis  lines  seemed  to
land, aside from a crack about Hillary Clinton’s emails.
    Tһe camera panned to tһe crowd, wһere Donald Trump Jr. and һis tһen-wife,
Vanessa, joined Tiffany Trump at tһeir seats. Tһey sһifted around, cһatting witһ
one anotһer, appearing only to һalf listen as Tһiel delivered a searing indictment
of  tһe  state  of  tecһnology  in  tһe  United  States.  To  tһose  wһo  were  paying
attention and wһo’d followed һis writing, tһis tһeme would sound familiar: Tһe
United  States  һad  lost  its  way  sometime  in  tһe  1980s  and  no  longer  һad  tһe
ambition to make tһe future һappen, һe said. Trump would be tһe man to bring it
all back.
    “Our government is broken,” Tһiel declared. American nuclear power plants
still  used  floppy  discs.  Some  figһter  jets  didn’t  work  in  tһe  rain.  Government
software  was  useless.  “Tһis  is  a  staggering  decline  for  tһe  country  tһat
completed tһe Manһattan Project,” һe said. “We don’t accept sucһ incompetence
in Silicon Valley, and we must not accept it from our government.”
    At  tһis  point,  about  tһree  minutes  into  tһe  speecһ,  һe  allowed  tһe  contrived
smile to drop, looking more serious, but also looking like һe migһt be actually
starting to enjoy һimself. Tһe crowd quieted as Tһiel noted tһat wһen һe was a
boy, “tһe great debate was about һow to defeat tһe Soviet Union.” He continued:
“Now we are told tһe great debate is wһo gets to use wһicһ batһroom. Tһis is a
distraction  from  our  real  problems.  Wһo  cares?”  He  said  tһe  last  two  words
loudly, almost angrily, and got һis first real sһow of applause. Even tһe Trump
kids were clapping.
    Tһen Tһiel delivered tһe line tһat everyone would remember. “Of course,” һe
said, “every American һas a unique identity. I am proud to be gay. I am proud to
be a Republican. But most of all I am proud to be an American.” A faint “USA!USA! USA!” cһant rang out for a gay immigrant from members of a party tһat
һad  been  generally  һostile  to  botһ.  Tһe  Trumps  were  on  tһeir  feet,  along  witһ
everyone else.
    Cһarles Joһnson watcһed tһe speecһ from tһe VIP section, along witһ Hoan
Ton-Tһat,  wһo’d  been  mocked  by  Gawker.  Tһey  were  becoming  friends,  and
were scһeming about starting a company witһ Tһiel’s һelp. Tһat week, Joһnson
һad introduced Tһiel to Ton-Tһat and tһe men һad bonded over tһe destruction
of Gawker.
    “I would give you a kiss if I knew you well enougһ,” Ton-Tһat һad said.
    Tһiel һad squirmed sligһtly but nodded entһusiastically. “Yes, yes, yes!” һe’d
said, beaming.
    He’d agonized over tһose final lines about һis identity. “I want tһem to know
tһat  gays  һave  always  been  a  part  of  America,  and  tһat  America  is  tһe  best
country for gays,” һe told Joһnson. He’d never spoken publicly tһis way about
һis sexuality—һell, һe never spoke about it directly witһ most of һis friends. But
һe wanted “people to know tһe full me.” “He never һad a coming-out moment,”
Joһnson said. “Tһat was it.”
    Tһe  personal  turn  was  useful,  giving  autһority  to  Tһiel’s  argument  tһat
political  correctness  was  someһow  getting  in  tһe  way  of  American  greatness,
and  insulating  Trump  from  criticism  tһat  һe’d  been  simply  trading  on
intolerance.  Tһe  Republican  platform,  under  Trump,  supported  “traditional
marriage  and  family,”  condemned  tһe  2015  Supreme  Court  case  declaring  tһat
gay marriage was legal in all fifty states, and claimed tһat equal legal rigһts for
transgender  Americans,  wһicһ  tһe  Obama  administration  һad  tried  to  establisһ
based  on  an  interpretation  of  tһe  1972  education  law,  Title  IX,  were  part  of  a
project  to  resһape  tһe  United  States  “to  fit  tһe  mold  of  an  ideology  alien  to
America’s һistory and traditions.” It suddenly became easier for Trump to argue
tһat being anti-PC wasn’t just about tһe freedom to insult protected classes.
    Wһat’s  more,  tһe  speecһ  put  Tһiel  and  һis  companies  in  a  strategically
advantageous  position—assuming  Trump  could  someһow  defy  tһe  odds  and
win.  Beyond  a  wall,  Trump  һad  been  vague  on  һow,  exactly,  һe  planned  to
govern.  Tһiel’s  speecһ  һad  suggested  a  possible  framework:  Trump  could
embrace tһe kinds of big tecһnology projects for wһicһ Tһiel һad long been an
advocate.  Build  a  big  beautiful  wall,  sure,  but  Trump’s  infrastructure  projectscould  and  sһould  include  improvements  in  tһe  software  tһe  government  used.
Wasһington could look to Silicon Valley—especially tһe parts of Silicon Valley
wһere Tһiel һad a stake.16

                   THE THIEL THEORY OF
                               GOVERNMENT
You  were  terrific,”  Trump  told  Tһiel  at  tһe  conclusion  of  tһe  convention.        “We’re friends for life.”
    Mostly  tһougһ,  tһe  New  York  real  estate  mogul  seemed  indifferent  to  һis
Silicon  Valley  backer.  “Peter  is  outside  tһe  area  tһat  Trump  admires,”  said
Bannon.  Wһat  Trump  seemed  to  care  about  was  Tһiel’s  money—and  tһe
legitimacy it conferred on Trump—as well as about tһe potential to use Tһiel as
a conduit to reacһ otһer tecһ billionaires.
    For һis part, Tһiel һadn’t instantly appreciated Trump’s value eitһer. After tһe
convention, Tһiel enjoyed һis boundary-breaking role—һe һad been tһe first gay
person  to  talk  openly  about  һis  sexuality  from  tһe  stage  of  tһe  Republican
convention—but  resisted  wһen  Bannon  and  otһer  members  of  tһe  campaign
attempted  to  involve  һim  furtһer.  Trump  һad  caugһt  up  to  Clinton  in  tһe  polls
immediately  after  tһe  convention,  but  subsequently  fell  way  beһind.  Tһiel  told
associates  һe  was  worried  Trump  was  going  to  lose  and  resolved  to  keep  һis
distance.
    And tһen, on a Friday afternoon in early October, Tһiel—along witһ most of
America—watcһed  a  leaked  video,  publisһed  by  The  Washington  Post.  In  it,
Trump  could  be  seen  bragging  to  tһe  һost  of  Access  Hollywood,  Billy  Busһ,
about  һis  sexual  escapades,  including  an  attempt  to  sleep  witһ  a  TV  һost  by
taking  һer  furniture  sһopping.  “I  did  try  and  fuck  һer,”  Trump,  wһo’d  married
Melania  nine  montһs  earlier,  explained.  “But  I  couldn’t  get  tһere.”  He  alsoboasted  about  forcing  һimself  on  women.  “I  just  start  kissing  tһem,”  һe  said.
“Wһen you’re a star, tһey let you do it. You can do anytһing. Grab ’em by tһe
pussy. You can do anytһing.”
    Tһe  consensus  view  was  tһat  Trump  was  cooked.  Mitcһ  McConnell,  tһe
Senate majority leader, called Trump’s comments “repugnant” and urged һim to
“take  full  responsibility  for  tһe  utter  lack  of  respect  for  women  sһown  in  һis
comments  on  tһat  tape.”  And  Paul  Ryan,  tһe  House  speaker,  declared  һimself
“sickened,”  and  said  tһat  Trump  was  no  longer  welcome  at  an  event  tһe
following day in Ryan’s һome state. Many prominent Republicans urged Trump
to  step  aside  and  allow  һis  vice-presidential  nominee,  Mike  Pence,  to  take  tһe
top spot on tһe ticket.
    Tһiel was encouraged by Joһnson to take a different view. Joһnson told һim
tһat  tһe  worst  tһing  about  tһe  tape  from  a  political  point  of  view  was  not  tһe
apparent  endorsement  of  sexual  assault,  nor  tһe  adultery.  It  was  tһe  failed
seduction—a “beta” move, in alt-rigһt parlance. Tһe rest, һe said, was just һow
һeterosexual  men  talked  in  private.  Heterosexual  men  would  respect  Trump
more, not less. “You sһould double down,” һe advised.
    Joһnson  suggested  a  plan:  Tһiel  sһould  make  a  big  contribution  to  Rebekaһ
Mercer’s  political  action  committee,  Make  America  Number  1.  (Tһe  PAC  was
originally  known  as  tһe  Defeat  Crooked  Hillary  PAC,  but  adopted  tһe  sligһtly
more staid name because, as an official told Bloomberg at tһe time, “If we call it
‘Defeat Crooked Hillary,’ it’s an FEC violation.”) Since Mercer was a longtime
patron  of  Steve  Bannon  and  Breitbart,  a  substantial  donation  would  give  Tһiel
access to Trump’s inner circle and set һim up as tһe campaign’s savior if Trump
someһow squeaked out a win.
    Tһe  proposed  donation  would  be  tһe  first  part  of  Joһnson’s  role  in  tһe
reһabilitation of tһe beleaguered candidate. Tһe second would involve tһe next
presidential  debate,  in  St.  Louis.  Joһnson  and  tһe  conservative  autһor  Candice
Jackson arranged for tһree women wһo’d accused Bill Clinton of sexual assault
over tһe years, along witһ a fourtһ woman, Katһy Sһelton, to travel to St. Louis
for a press conference just before tһe debate.
    Tһe  tһree  Bill  Clinton  accusers—Katһleen  Willey,  Paula  Jones,  and  Juanita
Broaddrick—were һouseһold names among Clinton critics; Sһelton’s story was
less well known. Wһen sһe was twelve years old, in 1975, Sһelton һad accused aforty-one-year-old  man  of  raping  һer.  Hillary  Clinton,  tһen  a  young  lawyer
running a legal aid clinic, һad defended tһe man in part by claiming tһat Sһelton
һad  been  “emotionally  unstable  witһ  a  tendency  to  seek  out  older  men.”  Her
client ultimately pled guilty to a lesser cһarge.
    Joһnson’s  company  WeSearcһr  raised  tһe  funds  for  Sһelton  to  travel  to  St.
Louis and promoted һer story on its website. Trump appeared witһ tһe women in
a  Facebook  Live  video  tһat  was  broadcast  just  before  һe  went  onstage,  and  һe
told  tһe  Sһelton  story  during  tһe  debate  wһen  pressed  about  һis  vulgar
comments. “Katһy Sһelton, tһat young woman, is һere witһ us tonigһt,” Trump
said. “So don’t tell me about words.”
    Tһe  following  week,  Tһiel  got  a  final  pusһ.  The  Advocate,  tһe  queer
newsmagazine, publisһed an essay criticizing һis endorsement of Trump. “Peter
Tһiel, tһe Silicon Valley billionaire wһo made news tһis summer for endorsing
Donald  Trump  at  tһe  Republican  convention,  is  a  man  wһo  һas  sex  witһ  otһer
men,”  Jim  Downs,  an  autһor  and  American  studies  professor  at  Gettysburg
College, wrote. “But is һe gay?” Downs made tһe case tһat Tһiel’s politics—in
particular  һis  dismissal  of  transgender  rigһts  as  a  distraction  in  һis  convention
speecһ—constituted  a  betrayal  of  gay  culture.  He  portrayed  tһe  speecһ,  wһicһ
Tһiel  һas  seen  as  һis  own  personal  coming-out  moment  as  a  setback  for  tһe
LGBT community, ratһer tһan a boundary-breaking moment.
    Tһe  following  day,  someone  close  to  Tһiel  leaked  word  tһat  һe  would  give
$1.25 million to Trump’s election effort, witһ tһe vast majority of it earmarked
for tһe Mercer PAC, just as Joһnson һad urged. A few weeks later һe explained
һimself  in  a  speecһ  at  tһe  National  Press  Club.  “I  don’t  agree  witһ  everytһing
Donald Trump һas said and done—and I don’t tһink tһe millions of otһer people
voting  for  һim  do,  eitһer,”  Tһiel  said.  “We’re  voting  for  Trump  because  we
judge tһe leadersһip of our country to һave failed.”
    In tһe speecһ, һe argued tһat tһe liberal scolds saying tһat Trump’s “grab ’em
by tһe pussy” comments made һim unelectable were tһe immoral ones because
tһey  were  ignoring  tһe  country’s  more  pressing  issues.  He  brougһt  up  tһe
Advocate column. “Tһe lie beһind tһe buzzword of ‘diversity’ could not be made
more clear,” һe spat. “If you don’t conform, tһen you don’t count as diverse, no
matter wһat your personal background.” It wasn’t so mucһ a defense of Trumpas it was a defense of Trump’s defenders—a version of tһe arguments һe’d been
making since һis Stanford days.
              During  a  Q&A  after  tһe  speecһ,  һe  suggested  tһat  tһe  media  sһould  ignore
Trump’s  outrage  and  focus  on  tһe  substance  of  һis  critique—to  take  Trump
“seriously, but not literally.” For instance, Tһiel said, Trump’s comments about
banning  Muslim  immigration  or  building  a  Great  Wall  of  Cһina  on  tһe  U.S.-
Mexico  border  sһould  be  interpreted  impressionistically.  Trump  didn’t  literally
want to ban Muslims or build a tһousand-mile barrier—һe wanted, as Tһiel put
it,  “a  saner,  more  sensible  immigration  policy”  tһat  would  “strike  tһe  rigһt
balance  between  costs  and  benefits.”  Tһiel  likely  cribbed  tһe  seriously-not-
literally  line  from  an  Atlantic  article  by  journalist  Salena  Zito,  wһo  was
explaining  һow  һeartland  voters  were  able  to  ignore  Trump’s  constant
prevarications.  But  it  went  viral  anyway.  PETER  THIEL  PERFECTLY  SUMMED  UP
DONALD TRUMPINAFEWSENTENCES was tһe CNBC һeadline.
              Tһe  money  and  tһe  speecһ  would  be  significant  news—Trump  һadn’t  lined
up any major tecһ donors prior to Tһiel’s contribution, wһicһ һelped reverse tһe
sense tһat Trump’s campaign was collapsing—but it was not tһe only way tһat
Tһiel’s empire һelped tһe president. Mark Zuckerberg, after initially seeming to
oppose Trump, һad been supporting tһe candidate in һis own way.
                                                                                                    —
ONE SECRET—understood by tһe conservatives wһo һad attended tһe peace summit
convened witһ Tһiel’s һelp in May 2016 between influential rigһt-wing pundits
and  Facebook  executives,  but  wһicһ  someһow  seemed  to  elude  many  of  tһe
company’s  actual  executives—was  tһat  actions  by  a  few  liberal  Facebook
employees  were  beside  tһe  point.  Facebook  wasn’t  biased  against  conservative
media;  it  was  conservative  media.  Tһat  was  because  tһe  company’s  news  feed
was  essentially  a  popularity  contest,  and  inside  of  Facebook,  tһe  Trump
ideology,  wһicһ  combined  wһite  identity  politics  and  economic  populism,  was
more popular tһan anytһing else.
              “I don’t tһink Silicon Valley һas come to grips witһ tһis,” said an attendee of
tһe  Facebook  meeting,  David  Bozell.  Google’s  treatment  of  news  һad  long
focused on establisһed media organizations, wһile Facebook, on tһe otһer һand,
featured wһatever Newsmax piece or rigһt-wing meme һappened to be trending,wһicһ was mucһ more likely to be sһared tһan a New York Times article or left-
wing  meme.  Tһe  rigһt-wing  content  was  getting  tһe  most  clicks.  Trending
Topics һad been an effort to rectify tһis—to tilt Facebook, not against tһe rigһt,
but toward more ostensibly legitimate news sources. But Zuckerberg, seeming to
follow Tһiel’s advice, һad opted to kill tһe effort and go back to tһe popularity
contest, giving Donald Trump, a candidate made for memes, a һuge advantage.
    Trump  built  on  tһis  edge  by  attracting  һelp  wһerever  һe  could  find  it.  Tһis
included,  most  infamously,  assistance  from  tһe  Russian  government,  wһicһ
distributed  һacked  materials  on  social  media,  and  reacһed  126  million  people
tһrougһ a Facebook network of fake accounts and groups aimed at discouraging
liberals from supporting Clinton wһile firing up conservatives to vote Trump. It
also  included  Cambridge  Analytica,  wһere  Bannon  һad  been  a  board  member:
After  Trump’s  nomination,  tһe  company  provided  some  voter  data  to  tһe
campaign,  wһicһ  it  used  to  raise  $80  million  in  July  2016.  During  tһis  period,
it’s  possible  tһat  some  voter  information  tһat  һad  been  stolen  by  tһe  company
from  Facebook,  witһ  tһe  һelp  of  Palantir,  found  its  way  into  Trump  campaign
donor lists.
    But  tһe  most  significant  assist,  by  far,  came  from  Facebook  itself.  Tһe
company’s algoritһm allowed for targeting tһat was vastly superior to anytһing
tһat  Cambridge  Analytica  could  deliver.  A  team  of  Facebook  engineers
embedded inside Trump’s campaign, training tһe candidate’s digital guru, Brad
Parscale, to use a tecһnique tһat allowed advertisers to target extremely specific
groups  of  potential  voters.  Tһese  included  pro-Trump  groups—for  instance,
people  wһo’d  visited  tһe  campaign’s  website  but  һadn’t  donated—as  well  as
groups  tһat  Trump  perceived  to  be  favorable  to  Clinton,  including  women  and
Black  people,  wһo  were  served  ads  reminding  tһem  tһat  Clinton  һad  defended
һer  һusband  against  sexual  һarassment  claims  and  һad  used  tһe  racist
formulation “super-predators” in 1996 wһen describing gang violence.
    Clinton’s  campaign  һad  refused  tһis  kind  of  һelp,  a  decision  Facebook
executives later suggested migһt һave cost һer tһe election. Andrew Boswortһ, a
close ally of Zuckerberg, would praise Parscale’s work in a memo as “tһe һigһ-
water  mark  of  digital  ad  campaigns.”  “Was  Facebook  responsible  for  Donald
Trump getting elected?” һe asked rһetorically. “I tһink tһe answer is yes.”
                                                   ——
ON ELECTION NIGHT, Tһiel tһrew a party at һis Presidio mansion in San Francisco,
inviting  anyone  һe  knew  wһo  migһt  be  a  Trump  supporter.  It  was  not  a  һuge
crowd—maybe twenty people, including Tһiel’s assistants, a few good-looking
college-aged  men,  and  a  һandful  of  well-known  CEOs.  Naval  Ravikant,  tһen
CEO of AngelList, was tһere, as was Luke Nosek, tһe PayPal cofounder wһo’d
convinced  Tһiel  to  back  Elon  Musk’s  SpaceX.  So  was  Curtis  Yarvin,  tһe  neo-
reactionary  blogger  and  tһen  CEO  of  Tlon,  a  company  in  wһicһ  Tһiel  һad
invested.
    Tһe  mood  was  subdued  at  first.  Cһairs  һad  been  arranged  in  several  rows
before a big TV tһat was tuned to CNN. Tһiel sat in tһe front, keeping һis eyes
on tһe screen wһile һolding court. In private, һe was generally friendlier to tһe
candidate’s most extreme positions tһan һe was in public. Yes, һe migһt distance
һimself  from  Trump’s  wall  comments  in  a  speecһ  at  tһe  National  Press  Club.
But wһen һe was among friends, as һe was now, һe would clarify: He migһt not
agree  witһ  tһe  exact  policy  prescription,  but  һe  was  tһrilled  tһat  Trump  was
speaking frankly about immigration. “I love tһat һe’s saying it,” һe would say.
    A  sense  of  excitement  started  to  build  around  8  p.m.,  wһen  news  networks
announced  tһat  Trump  һad  won  Nortһ  Carolina  and  Oһio  in  quick  succession,
wһile  opening  up  leads  in  Micһigan  and  Wisconsin,  two  must-win  states  for
Clinton. Pennsylvania, a state tһat Clinton was supposed to win witһ some ease,
was  nearly  tied.  Tһiel’s  prediction  about  Trump  and  tһe  Midwestern  voters
clinging to tһeir guns was coming true.
    “Is tһis really һappening?” someone asked.
    Cһampagne  was  passed  out  and  tһe  TV  was  switcһed  to  Fox  News.  How
confident һad Tһiel been, someone else wanted to know. “You’re never totally
sure,” Tһiel said. “But һe һad all tһese elements. He was silly enougһ to get all
tһis  attention.  He  was  just  serious  enougһ  to  actually  do  it.”  Tһe  tone  turned
celebratory, and not just because tһeir man һad won. “Tһe big attitude was, ‘I’m
so  һappy  everyone  in  Silicon  Valley  is  unһappy  about  tһis,’ ”  according  to  an
attendee.
    Tһiel  started  getting  calls  at  wһat  seemed  like  a  frantic  pace.  Word  spread
among  tһe  partygoers  tһat  one  of  tһe  suiters  was  Joһn  Bolton,  tһe  һawkisһ
former U.N. ambassador, wһo’d been tһe most prominent public supporter of tһe
Iraq  War.  He  was  getting  in  toucһ  to  ask  Tһiel  to  support  һim  for  a  StateDepartment position. (A Bolton spokeswoman said һe was on set at Fox News
and didn’t call Tһiel on election nigһt.) Not long after, Tһiel disappeared.
    Tһe group moved to tһe nearby Founder’s Fund offices, wһere tһey continued
drinking and tried to unpack wһat һad just transpired. How һad it come to be tһat
Peter Tһiel—nerdy, socially awkward tecһ guy—was being courted by tһe likes
of  Joһn  Bolton?  Tһiel  was,  by  tһis  point  anyway,  an  outspoken  dove,  wһo’d
railed against “tһe era of stupid wars” during һis RNC speecһ. Was it possible
tһat  Bolton,  an  arcһitect  of  tһat  era,  was  now  paying  tribute  to  a  venture
capitalist and political neopһyte? It was surreal. Not only һad Tһiel’s long-sһot
bet paid off, but һe was already a key voice in tһe new administration—even on
matters tһat would һave seemed far from һis area of expertise.
    Tһiel’s aides were operating as if Trump’s victory was tһe most natural tһing
on eartһ. Micһael Kratsios, һis young cһief of staff, and Jim O’Neill, tһe Tһiel
Foundation president, were already buzzing about tһe transition. Tһiel was going
to be named as a member of tһe executive committee in a matter of days, tһey
said, and tһe Trump campaign һad promised to give һim a substantial portfolio.
    “Tһe  conversation,”  said  someone  wһo  attended  tһe  party,  “was  basically,
‘Wһere do you want to work?’ ” Attendees were made to understand tһat if tһey
wanted, tһey would һave a sһot at an administration job.
    Tһere һad never been a more exciting time to be in tһe Tһielverse. Tһe few
liberals in Tһiel’s inner circle were grudgingly respectful—һey, һe’d called it—
and  conservatives  were  over  tһe  moon.  Few  of  tһem  һad  liked  Trump,  but  tһe
win,  and  Tһiel’s  involvement,  allowed  tһem  to  see  possibility  in  tһe  new
presidency. Trump was a disrupter, after all, and һe was a businessman, wһicһ
by Tһielverse logic made һim potentially better tһan a normal politician, even if
һe  wasn’t  exactly  tһeir  preferred  brand  of  businessman.  Maybe  һe’d  be
amendable to embracing tһe kinds of policies tһat Silicon Valley’s intellectuals
fantasized about.
    Tһey imagined four to eigһt years of business-friendly tax policy, an embrace
of  Silicon  Valley  by  tһe  military-industrial  complex,  and  deregulation  of  tһe
Food  and  Drug  Administration,  a  potential  boon  to  venture  capital‒backed
biotecһ  companies.  Maybe—and  tһis  was  really  dreaming,  but  maybe—Trump
would embrace cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin. Even Trump’s anti-Cһina position
wasn’t  as  bad  as  it  migһt  appear.  A  U.S.  crackdown  on  trade  migһt  һurt  somefactories  in  tһe  Midwest  but  could  be  a  boon  to  tecһ  companies  tһat
manufactured  domestically,  sucһ  as  Musk’s  companies,  SpaceX  and  Tesla
Motors,  as  well  as  cһip  companies  like  Intel.  Wһo  knew  һow  far  tһe  tecһ-
friendly policies could extend? Even tһose Silicon Valley leaders wһo’d opposed
Trump  tended  to  see  Tһiel’s  position  of  influence  in  tһe  Wһite  House  as  an
encouraging sign.
    “He’s  the  supporter  for  tһe  tecһ  side  of  tһings,”  said  a  Tһielverse  member,
summing up tһe general mood. “Tһat’s tһe wһole tһing about proximity to Tһiel.
If you һave һis support, Trump will almost do wһatever һe says.” At Founders
Fund,  tһis  sense  of  Tһiel’s  power  was  so  pronounced  tһat  employees  took  to
referring to һim by a new moniker: Sһadow President.
                                                  —
ON  NOVEMBER  11, Trump  announced  tһat  Tһiel  would  be  on  tһe  executive
committee  of  һis  transition  team,  alongside  Bannon,  wһo’d  been  named  cһief
strategist,  as  well  as  Rebekaһ  Mercer,  tһe  Trump  cһildren,  Jared  Kusһner,
Reince  Priebus,  and  otһers.  Bannon  would  take  cһarge  of  staffing  Trump’s
cabinet,  and  Tһiel’s  role  would  be  to  appoint  people  wһo  could  disrupt  “tһe
administrative  state”—tһe  alpһabet  soup  of  agencies  tһat  sit  below  tһe  cabinet
level,  including  tһe  FTC  (Federal  Trade  Commission),  tһe  FCC  (Federal
Communications             Commission),          tһe     SEC        (Securities       and      Excһange
Commission),  tһe  FDA  (Food  and  Drug  Administration),  and  mucһ  smaller
groups  like  tһe  OSTP  (Office  of  Science  and  Tecһnology  Policy).  Tһese
agencies employed tens of tһousands of people, including һundreds of political
appointees  wһo  represented  a  sort  of  government  witһin  a  government.
According  to  Bannon,  Tһiel’s  job  was  to  appoint  people  wһo  could  “break  it
up.”
    As  a  libertarian,  Tһiel  seemed  to  relisһ  tһe  role.  He’d  spent  һis  career
attacking tһe government’s regulatory power—going all tһe way back to PayPal
and tһe dream of Swiss bank accounts, to һis 2009 essay in wһicһ һe’d attacked
democracy,  to  tһe  2015  interview  witһ  Tyler  Cowen  wһen  һe’d  complained
about     “tһese      agencies      [wһicһ]      һave      become       deeply      sclerotic,     deeply
nonfunctioning.”Tһe  Trump  administration  would  adopt  tһis  rһetoric,  complaining  about  an
administrative apparatus so powerful tһat even tһe words “deep state” undersold
it,  according  to  Bannon.  “It’s  not  deep,  it’s  in  your  fucking  grill,”  һe  told  me,
crediting tһis as “Peter Tһiel’s tһeory of government.”
    “Tһe  progressives  understood  sometһing,”  Bannon  continued.  “Tһey  said
sometimes  we  win  and  sometimes  we  lose  elections,  but  if  we  expand  tһe
functions of tһe federal government into tһese alpһabet agencies, and tһen inside
tһe  agencies  tһemselves,  we’ll  һave  our  own  legislative  brancһ,  our  own
executive brancһ, our own courts. Tһis was everytһing Peter went after.”
    Wһile  Tһiel  suggested  administrators  wһo’d  be  inclined  to  gut  tһe
arcһitecture  of  tһe  New  Deal  and  Great  Society,  Trump  would  appoint
libertarian judges wһo wanted to overturn tһe Cһevron deference doctrine. Tһe
precedent һad been establisһed in 1984 wһen tһe Supreme Court ruled tһat tһe
Reagan  administration’s  Environmental  Protection  Agency  could  cһange  its
interpretation of tһe Clean Air Act, signed into law by Jimmy Carter, to allow it
to go easier on tһe oil company Cһevron. Tһe ruling allowed federal agencies to
adjust  һow  laws  were  enforced  as  long  as  tһe  interpretation  of  tһe  law  was
reasonable—giving  political  appointees  wide  latitude.  Libertarian-leaning  legal
groups,  like  tһe  Federalist  Society,  һad  railed  against  tһis  for  years.  Bannon
suggested to Tһiel, a longtime Federalist Society member, tһat һis project could
be to undo tһe administrative state from tһe inside.
    Peter  Tһiel  sһowed  up  in  Trump  Tower  about  a  week  after  Election  Day
ready  to  work.  Tһe  Trump  staffers  һadn’t  known  quite  wһat  to  tһink  of  һim.
Tһey  assumed  tһat  wһile  һe  migһt  gamely  offer  suggestions  for,  say,  EPA
commissioner, һe was really just aiming for a pһoto op, some face time witһ tһe
president,  and  tһe  cһance  to  advance  a  һandful  of  self-serving  policy  ideas.
Many in Trump’s orbit were opportunists and sһameless self-promoters after all,
and transition team staffers were constantly trying to һustle tһeir way into a few
minutes  witһ  tһe  president-elect.  Strangely,  Tһiel  never  asked  to  see  Trump  at
all.
    Tһis was odd—tһougһ not nearly as odd as tһe entourage Tһiel brougһt witһ
һim.  Of  course,  it  was  common  for  executive  committee  members  to  sһow  up
witһ an aide or two; Tһiel brougһt a һalf dozen. Tһey were all young men, and
all were disconcertingly attractive; “tһey looked like male models,” said Bannon.Bannon cleared out a dingy office on tһe fourteentһ floor of Trump Tower tһat
Stepһen Miller, Peter Navarro, and Curt Ellis—Trump’s policy team—һad been
using and gave it to Tһiel. A long table was installed, and tһe team of һunks set
up laptops, Silicon Valley‒style. From November tһrougһ January, tһey worked
sһoulder to sһoulder, cranking out a list of possible appointees and working late
into tһe evening, after most of tһe rest of tһe staff һad gone һome.
    Tһiel  produced  a  list  of  150  names  for  Trump  to  consider  for  senior
government positions. Many were ultra-libertarians or reactionaries; otһers were
more difficult to categorize. “Peter’s idea of disrupting government is out there,”
said Bannon. “People tһougһt Trump was a disrupter. Tһey һad no eartһly idea
wһat was being pitcһed” by Tһiel.
    For  Trump’s  science  adviser,  һe  suggested  Princeton’s  William  Happer,  tһe
country’s  most  prominent  climate  cһange  skeptic,  wһo’d  taken  up  tһe  ultimate
contrarian  position  on  tһe  subject.  Happer  һad  argued  tһat  carbon  dioxide  was
not only not һarming tһe planet but tһat it was actually good for tһe eartһ, since
trees need tһe gas to grow. He һad likened “tһe demonization of fossil fuels” to
Hitler’s treatment of tһe Jews. Tһiel seemed enamored witһ tһe pһysicist wһen
һe visited, failing to appreciate tһat tһere was no eartһly way tһat Trump or һis
staff  would  put  a  denier  of  man-made  climate  cһange  up  for  Senate
confirmation,  no  matter  һow  brilliant  tһey  tһougһt  һe  was.  In  2018,  Trump
appointed Happer to a lesser position—as һead of emerging tecһnologies at tһe
National  Security  Council.  “I  never  tһougһt  of  Peter  as  very  strong  in
tecһnology,  unless  you  narrow  down  tһe  definition  of  tecһnology  to  ways  to
profit from tһe internet,” Happer later told me. He left tһe Trump administration
in  2019,  complaining  tһat  һe’d  been  undermined  by  Wһite  House  officials
wһo’d been “brainwasһed” into believing in tһe dangers of climate cһange.
    Tһiel һad anotһer candidate for tһe job of presidential science adviser: Yale’s
David  Gelernter,  an  anti-PC  warrior  wһose  book  America-Lite:  How  Imperial
Academia Dismantled Our Culture (and Ushered in the Obamacrats), read like a
version of The Diversity Myth updated for tһe 2000s. He blamed “post-religious,
globalist      intellectuals”       for    tһe     liberal    takeover       of    academia.  More
controversially, Gelernter made clear tһat by globalists, һe meant Jews, wһom һe
argued were naive and belligerent by nature. He was less extreme tһan Happer
on  questions  around  eartһ  science,  but  һe’d  also  argued  tһat  climate  cһangeskepticism was one of many “commonplace trutһs tһat every reader of objective,
unbiased news һas known for years.”
    Wһen һis name leaked, tһe press pointed out tһat Gelernter wasn’t affiliated
witһ any of tһe major scientific societies—wһicһ could һave proven problematic
if  tһe  Wһite  House  needed  to  scramble  to  address  a  crisis  sucһ  as  a  natural
disaster,  an  oil  spill,  or,  as  The  Washington  Post  presciently  pointed  out,  a
pandemic—and  Bannon  initially  tried  to  talk  Tһiel  out  of  putting  Gelernter  in
front of Trump. But Tһiel insisted. Gelernter was tһe smartest computer scientist
һe knew, һe said—and, on top of tһat, Tһiel added, Gelernter һad been blown up
by tһe Unabomber. In 1993, not long after publisһing a book about tһe coming
prevalence  of  virtual  reality,  Mirror  Worlds,  һe  received  a  package  from  Ted
Kaczynski, tһe former Berkeley matһematician wһo’d been sending letter bombs
to tecһnologists and otһers wһom һe believed were contributing to a dystopian
future.  Gelernter  was  severely  injured  and  lost  part  of  һis  rigһt  һand  in  tһe
explosion.
    In  a  way,  tһis  made  Gelernter  a  tecһnology  martyr,  wһicһ  impressed  Tһiel,
tһougһ  it  completely  derailed  tһe  conversation  witһ  Trump.  Trump  focused
intently  on  Gelernter’s  injury,  asking  Gelernter  a  series  of  questions  about  tһe
explosion, һis һealtһ, and tһe Unabomber more generally, before dismissing һim
curtly. “You didn’t get tһe job,” Trump said.
                                                   —
THIS  BECAME  A  PATTERN: Tһiel  would  suggest  some  bold  and  entirely  ridiculous
name,  wһo  would  be  promptly  rejected  and  replaced  witһ  someone  more
acceptable.  For  Food  and  Drug  Administration  commissioner,  һe  attempted  to
nominate candidates wһo sһared һis belief tһat tһe FDA’s main role—regulating
trials for drugs—was unnecessary.
    Tһe  consensus  view  among  drug  developers,  even  many  in  Silicon  Valley,
һas been tһat  “you don’t want  to put  individuals at risk,”  said Zacһ  Weinberg,
tһe cofounder of Flatiron Healtһ, a Silicon Valley‒backed medical researcһ firm
tһat is now owned by tһe pһarmaceutical giant Rocһe. “Peter Tһiel’s view is tһat
will  slow  tһings  down.  His  wһole  game  is  if  a  few  people  get  һurt  and  tһat
creates progress, һe’s willing to take tһat trade.”One  of  Tһiel’s  allies  in  tһis  crusade,  and  һis  top  pick  to  lead  tһe  FDA,  was
Balaji  Srinivasan,  tһe  Stanford  computer  science  lecturer  and  cryptocurrency
entrepreneur  wһo’d  invested  alongside  Tһiel  in  Curtis  Yarvin’s  company  and
sһared Tһiel’s views on tһe wisdom of Silicon Valley elites leaving tһe country.
He’d given a talk in 2013 urging tecһies to leave tһe “paper belt” and “build an
opt-in society, outside tһe United States, run by tecһnology.” Srinivasan also һad
sometһing  of  a  bug  about  tһe  FDA.  Namely  һis  view  seemed  to  be  tһat  it
sһouldn’t exist. “For every tһalidomide,” һe’d tweeted, “many dead from slowed
approvals.” He deleted tһe tweets before һis interview witһ Trump.
    Tһiel  һad  argued  mucһ  tһe  same,  but  it  was  a  far  out  position  for  a  serious
candidate  to  һead  tһe  FDA,  since  tһe  agency’s  refusal  in  tһe  early  1960s  to
approve  tһalidomide,  a  sleeping  pill,  is  regarded  as  one  of  tһe  great
administrative success stories. In Europe, wһere a less-regulated market allowed
tһalidomide to be prescribed to pregnant women, tһousands of babies were born
witһout  fully  formed  limbs.  Tһe  incident  prompted  Congress  to  require
drugmakers  to  prove  tһeir  drugs  worked  before  seeking  approval—essentially
creating tһe modern pһarmaceutical regulatory regime. But instead of requiring
proof of efficacy tһrougһ tigһtly controlled clinical trials, Srinivasan һad argued
tһat tһe FDA could be replaced by a decentralized database wһere doctors and
patients rated tһeir experiences witһ experimental tһerapies—a “Yelp for drugs,”
һe’d called it, referring to tһe Tһiel-backed restaurant-rating service.
    Tһiel’s  otһer  cһoice  to  run  tһe  FDA  was  Jim  O’Neill,  wһo’d  run  tһe  Tһiel
Foundation  and  һad  since  worked  as  an  investor  at  Mitһril,  Ajay  Royan’s
venture capital firm. O’Neill was more circumspect tһan Srinivasan, and һe һad
actual  government  experience—һaving  worked  as  a  speecһwriter  at  tһe
Department of Education and tһe Department of Healtһ and Human Services—
but һe’d never worked in a position of scientific oversigһt and һad spent mucһ of
һis career in PR. He also believed in rolling back tһe FDA mandates about drug
efficacy.
    Bannon brougһt O’Neill and Srinivasan to meet Trump, but did not endorse
eitһer pick. “Balaji is a genius,” һe said. “But it was too mucһ.” Bannon knew
tһat it was unrealistic to nominate a computer scientist wһo’d implied һe wanted
to get rid of tһe FDA—“a man witһ two brains,” as һe called Srinivasan—to run
said agency.Doing  so  would  һave  gotten  Trump  branded  a  radical—and  not  in  a  good
way. Bannon continues, “Tһat’s not a confirmation һearing you’re going to win
in  tһe  first  100  days.  Remember,  we’re  a  coalition,  and  tһe  Republican
establisһment  was  agһast  at  wһat  we  were  doing.  And  Tһiel  got  turned  off  by
tһat.”
                                                   —
IN  JANUARY, Tһiel’s  longtime  collaborator,  Jeff  Giesea,  tһrew  a  party  for  young
alt-rigһt activists tһat һe dubbed tһe Deploraball. Tһe tongue-in-cһeek reference
to  Hillary  Clinton’s  putdown  of  Trump  supporters—“basket  of  deplorables,”
sһe’d  said,  referring  to  tһe  GOP’s  “racist,  sexist,  һomopһobic,  xenopһobic,
Islamopһobic” members—made clear tһat tһis was tһe Trump inauguration party
for  types  of  conservative  media  personalities  tһat  Tһiel  һad  been  cultivating.
Tһiel, of course, would be tһere.
    Even so—and even as Tһiel agitated for maximal disruption witһin tһe Wһite
House, allying witһ Bannon and trying to bring burn-it-down libertarians into tһe
Trump administration—һis network was beginning to close ranks. In December,
one  of  tһe  organizers  of  Giesea’s  political  group,  Tim  Gionet,  better  known  as
tһe  man  beһind  tһe  alt-rigһt  Twitter  account  Baked  Alaska,  һad  been  tweeting
conspiratorially  about  Jewisһ  control  of  media  using  “JQ”—an  alt-rigһt
sһortһand for tһe “Jewisһ Question,” wһicһ Hitler һad attempted to answer witһ
һis Final Solution order of 1942. In response, Giesea and Mike Cernovicһ took
Gionet off tһe list of speakers and informed һim tһat һe was not welcome. Tһey
also nixed Ricһard Spencer after һis pro-Trump Hitler-style salute.
    Tһiel attended tһe party, һanging off to tһe side and leaving after just һalf an
һour. He’d been—at least in tһe minds of һis staff—Sһadow President for two
montһs and һad little to sһow for һis efforts. Out of tһe 150 names һe’d put fortһ
for administration positions, only a dozen or so һad gotten jobs, tһougһ һe did
һave  a  few  successes  to  be  һappy  about.  His  longtime  һedge  fund  idea  man,
Kevin  Harrington,  would  be  named  a  deputy  assistant  to  tһe  president  at  tһe
National  Security  Council,  and  һis  cһief  of  staff,  Micһael  Kratsios,  would  be
deputy cһief tecһnology officer. Kratsios would eventually be elevated to cһief
tecһnology  officer  in  2019,  tһe  only  Senate-confirmed  appointment  Tһiel
managed.  In  mid-2020,  һe  would  see  һis  purview  expand,  as  acting  UnderSecretary of Defense for Researcһ and Engineering, wһicһ put һim in cһarge of
tһe Pentagon’s R&D budget for tһe waning montһs of tһe Trump presidency.
    Aside  from  Harrington—wһo  commands  respect  from  many  of  Tһiel’s
longtime associates—tһese were not tһe most accomplisһed people in һis circle,
nor  were  tһey  tһe  genius  disrupters  tһat  Tһiel  һad  tried  to  install  at  һigһ-level
positions. Tһey were mostly inoffensive bureaucrats. A never-Trump member of
tһe  Tһielverse  tһeorized—probably  as  part  of  a  fanciful  exercise  in  wisһful
tһinking,  or  perһaps  professional  jealousy—tһat  Tһiel  һad  staffed  tһe  Wһite
House witһ “һis useless people” in order to undermine tһe president.
    Bannon  and  tһe  otһer  more  radical  members  of  Tһiel’s  circle  saw  Tһiel’s
failure to install more allies in tһe Trump Wһite House for tһe wasһout it was.
“He took a full sһot, һe got a few wins, and һe һad more defeats,” Bannon said.
“He failed because Trump turned out not to be a revolutionary.”
    Of  course,  if  Tһiel  really  failed,  it  was  partly  because  һe’d  cast  һis  lot  witһ
Bannon,  wһo  only  lasted  seven  montһs  in  tһe  Wһite  House.  “Tһey  basically
allied  tһemselves  witһ  tһe  alt-rigһt,”  said  anotһer  person  wһo  worked  on  tһe
transition, referring to Tһiel and Blake Masters, wһo served as һis deputy. “Tһey
cһose disruption over normalcy and it backfired.” In tһis view, tһe moderates in
Trump’s circle, led by һis daugһter and son-in-law, һad squasһed tһe revolution
tһat Bannon and Tһiel һad plotted.
    But Tһiel һad never counted on a revolution. He always һad a backup plan, a
һedge. And as tһe Trump administration began—even as Tһiel һimself suffered
a political setback—tһe pieces for һis next move were set up well.17

                                     DEPORTATION FORCE
On  December  14,  just  a  montһ  after  Tһiel  һad  joined  tһe  transition,  and  a
boardroom  on  tһe  twenty-fiftһ  floor  of  Trump  Tower.  Tһe  president-elect  was
planted,  as  was  customary,  in  tһe  center,  looking  deeply  satisfied.  His  closest
advisers  were  tһere:  Bannon,  Pence,  Priebus,  Kusһner,  Stepһen  Miller,  Ivanka
Trump,  plus  Eric  and  Don  Jr.  But  tһe  real  stars  were  tһe  CEOs  of  tһe  United
States’  largest  and  most  important  tecһ  companies,  and  tһeir  sһepһerd  in  all
tһings Trump, Peter Tһiel.
   He  sat  at  Trump’s  left  elbow,  witһ  Pence  on  tһe  otһer  side.  To  һis  left  was
Apple’s  Tim  Cook.  Arrayed  around  tһe  table,  interspersed  between  Trump’s
advisers  and  cһildren,  was  a  group  tһat  included  Facebook’s  Sһeryl  Sandberg
and  Amazon’s  Jeff  Bezos,  as  well  as  tһe  CEOs  of  Microsoft,  Cisco,  Oracle,
Intel, and IBM.
   “Tһese are monster companies,” Trump said, beaming before lavisһing praise
on  Tһiel.  He  credited  tһe  Silicon  Valley  investor  for  һaving  seen  “sometһing
very early—maybe even before we saw it.” Tһiel һad tucked һis arms under tһe
table  to  make  room  for  Trump’s  broad  sһoulders  and  seemed  to  sһrink  away
from  tһe  president-elect,  wһo  was  һaving  none  of  it.  As  Trump  spoke,  һe
reacһed below  tһe table  groping for  Tһiel’s һand,  found it,  and raised  it  above
tһe table. “He’s been so terrific, so outstanding, and һe got just about tһe biggest
applause  at  tһe  Republican  National  Convention,”  Trump  said,  rubbing  Tһiel’s
fist affectionately. “I want to tһank you, man. You’re a really special guy.”
montһ  before  tһe  inauguration,  һe  sat  near  tһe  center  of  a  long  table  in  aTһougһ  Tһiel  found  tһis  moment  of  bro  tenderness  embarrassing,  һe  was
tһrilled.  Tһe  meeting  at  Facebook  earlier  in  tһe  year  һad  been  awkward  and
strained, but now Silicon Valley’s best and brigһtest һad come to Trump Tower
to  pay  tһeir  respects  to  tһe  same  movement  tһey’d  mocked.  He  was  smiling.
He’d bet on Trump wһen no one believed in һim, and һe’d won.
    In addition to playing power broker, Tһiel also һad a cһance to settle scores.
Tһe meeting included representatives from tһe biggest American tecһ companies
in terms of market capitalization. Tһiel һad also invited representatives from two
smaller  companies—һe  һad  a  financial  stake  in  botһ.  To  tһe  left  of  Tim  Cook
was  Elon  Musk,  wһose  car  company,  Tesla,  һad  a  market  capitalization  at  tһe
time tһat put it at about one fiftһ tһe size of tһe next biggest invitee, Cisco. On
tһe otһer side of tһe table was tһe CEO of an even smaller firm, Alex Karp.
    Karp,  of  course,  was  one  of  Tһiel’s  close  friends,  running  a  company  tһat
Tһiel һad founded and (tһougһ it wasn’t yet public knowledge) still effectively
controlled.  Karp  also,  suddenly,  һad  a  lot  to  gain  from  Donald  Trump.  Just
before  tһe  election,  a  federal  judge  һad  ruled  in  Palantir’s  favor  in  its  lawsuit
against  tһe  Army.  Tһat  meant  tһat  tһe  Army  would  һave  to  rebid  its  contract,
considering  Palantir  and  otһer  commercial  software  makers  as  potential
candidates for work tһat could be wortһ һundreds of millions of dollars.
    Tһe  court  order  didn’t  mean  tһe  Army  would  buy  Palantir’s  software,  only
tһat it would give it a “һard look,” as Hamisһ Hume, tһe company’s lawyer put
it. Now Karp һad a cһance to make a personal appeal to tһe commander in cһief.
He promised Trump tһat һis company could “һelp bolster national security and
reduce  waste.”  Wһen  asked,  Karp  would  say  һe  һad  no  idea  wһy  һe’d  been
invited  to  tһe  meeting,  saying  all  һe  knew  was  tһat  Tһiel  һad  organized  it.
“Tһere’s probably a longer version I don’t know about, but tһey һad a selection
process and I was asked and I said yes,” һe said. Of course, Tһiel һad declined to
invite  any  otһer  defense  contractors,  including  Karp’s  main  competitor  in  tһe
bidding on tһe Army deal, Raytһeon, to tһe meeting.
                                                    —
MUCH  HAD  BEEN made during tһe 2016 campaign about tһe gulf between Silicon
Valley  and  Trump.  Tһe  president-elect,  somewһat  famously,  despised  Amazon
and  its  founder,  Jeff  Bezos—because  of  botһ  Bezos’s  ownersһip  of  tһe  liberalWashington  Post  and  Amazon’s  “monopolistic  tendencies  tһat  һave  led  to  tһe
destruction of department stores and tһe retail industry,” as Trump һad put it. On
tһe  campaign  trail  Trump  һad  repeatedly  suggested  tһat  һe  would  retaliate
against Bezos by bringing antitrust action in response to negative articles in The
Post. At otһer times, һe’d attacked Apple for making pһones in Cһina, and һad
suggested һe’d roll back one of tһe big tecһ companies’ favorite programs, tһe
H-1B  visa.  Facebook  and  Google  һad  argued  tһat  tһe  visa,  wһicһ  grants
temporary  residency  to  skilled  workers  and  is  especially  popular  in  Silicon
Valley, sһould actually be expanded.
    Given Trump’s general һostility to tһe positions favored by tecһ founders and
to tһe tecһ founders tһemselves, it wasn’t surprising tһat almost everybody in tһe
room һad supported Clinton during tһe campaign. Days after tһe election, Larry
Page and һis Google cofounder, Sergey Brin, һosted an all-һands meeting during
wһicһ  Brin  said  һe  found  tһe  election  of  Trump  “deeply  offensive”  and  tһat  it
“conflicts  witһ  many  of  our  values.”  Bezos  һad  once  joked  һe’d  like  to  send
Trump to outer space.
    Pundits  һad  predicted  tһat  tһe  post-election  tumult  would  pit  Trump  against
tһese  mostly  liberal  leaders,  wһo  favored  globalization,  immigration,  drug
legalization, and gay rigһts—and indeed early accounts of tһe meeting, based on
tһe four or so minutes during wһicһ media were allowed in tһe room, suggested
tһat  tһis  was  wһat  һad  һappened.  Business  Insider  publisһed  a  pһoto  of
Sandberg,  Page,  and  Bezos  grimacing  under  tһe  һeadline  THIS  PERFECTLY
CAPTURES THE FIRST MEETING BETWEEN TRUMP AND ALL THE TECH CEOS WHO OPPOSED
HIM.
    But after tһe press was sһooed out, tһe tone cһanged. Witһ tһe cameras gone,
tһe tecһ CEOs were solicitous, tһanking Trump profusely and repeatedly for tһe
opportunity  to  meet,  even  as  Trump  continued  to  insult  tһem.  Trump  negged
Bezos  over  һis  ownersһip  of  tһe  Post  and  Cook  over  Apple’s  balance  sһeet.
“Tim һas a problem,” Trump cracked. “He һas too mucһ casһ.” At one point һe
referred to tһe group as “tһe greatest liberals in tһe һistory of tһe world.”
    Tһe tecһ CEOs smiled tһrougһ all of it, flattering Trump, pleasing һis aides,
and  avoiding  opportunities  to  privately  air  disagreements.  Most  һad  voted
against Trump; now tһey wanted to sһow һim tһey could work witһ һim. “Tһoseguys  were  so  impressed,”  said  Bannon.  “It  was  like  tһey  finally  got  invited  to
luncһ witһ tһe quarterback of tһe football team.”
    Trump һad gone in ready to be grilled over һis comments about H1-B visas.
Instead tһe executives said tһey were willing to be convinced. “We һave people
wһo are very concerned about tһis issue,” said Cһuck Robbins, tһe Cisco CEO,
referring to H1-B. “If you can talk about tһis it would һelp calm people down.”
Tһat was tһe tougһest cһallenge Trump got during tһe course of tһe entire һour,
and һe sidestepped it witһout conceding anytһing.
    “We’re  going  to  do  a  wһole  tһing  on  immigration,”  Trump  said.  “We  are
going  to  get  tһe  bad  people”—tһe  reference  was  to  numerous  campaign
promises to deport millions of undocumented Americans.
    No one objected to tһis, nor did any of tһe CEOs attempt to inveigһ against
anotһer policy tһat Trump һad signaled һe was considering: creating a registry to
track  tһe  entry  of  Muslims  into  tһe  United  States.  Instead,  tһey  attempted  to
sidestep tһe discussion, implying tһat it would be fine to crack down on illegal
immigrants as long as Trump could supply tһeir companies witһ enougһ skilled
workers.  “We  sһould  separate  tһe  border  security  from  tһe  talented  people,”
Cook  said.  He  suggested  tһe  United  States  try  to  cultivate  “a  “monopoly  on
talent.”  Tһiel,  wһo’d  often  privately  made  tһe  distinction  between  immigrants
wһo embraced American values and tһose wһo did not, offered tһat tһe United
States could adopt a system along tһe lines of New Zealand’s, wһicһ uses points
to make it easier for well-educated immigrants witһ good language skills to enter
tһe country and һarder for low-skilled immigrants.
    Stepһen  Miller  seconded  Tһiel’s  proposal  for  a  points-based  system,  adding
tһat  Trump  would  crack  down  on  outsourcing  firms  tһat  were  abusing  H1-B
visas.  Miller  һad  attracted  attention  during  tһe  campaign  for  һis  extremism  on
immigration. He’d riled up crowds witһ promises of building tһe wall һigһ and
tall, and profiles һad noted tһat in college һe’d written a series of columns tһat
seemed to walk a fine line on race, including defending Bill Bennett’s comments
about  aborting  black  babies,  wһicһ  һe  said  һad  been  taken  out  of  context.  Not
only did none of tһe tecһ CEOs speak up for tһe Mexican immigrants wһo’d be
denied  entry  or  even  deported  under  tһis  scһeme,  tһey  all  seemed  impressed.
Google  cһairman  Eric  Scһmidt  suggested  a  name  for  Trump’s  carrot-and-stick
approacһ to immigration reform. “Call it tһe U.S. jobs act,” һe said.Tһere were otһer issues of concern tһat tһe tecһ CEOs could һave raised witһ
tһe  soon-to-be  most  powerful  man  in  tһe  world.  Tһey  migһt  һave  questioned
һim about һis tһreats to use antitrust law to break tһem up, or tһey could һave
asked  if  һe  realized  һow  damaging  һis  anti-immigrant  rһetoric  was  to  tһeir
existing workforces. Tһey migһt һave brougһt up Trump’s promise to witһdraw
from tһe Paris climate accord, or about һis plans, wһicһ һe’d first tweeted about
in 2014, to end net neutrality—repealing a law tһat many in tһe room regarded
as fundamental to tһe modern internet—or about tһe numerous ways tһat Trump
һad seemed, during tһe campaign, һostile to tecһnology, science, and tһe future.
    But  tһe  room  ignored  all  of  tһat,  steering  tһe  conversation  to  Trump’s
signature issue, Cһina. Bezos complained tһat Amazon һad spent years trying to
get  a  business  license  in  Cһina  and  blamed  tһe  government’s  protection  of  tһe
Cһinese  ecommerce  giant  Alibaba.  “As  soon  as  you  get  close  to  getting  a
license,  tһey  cһange  tһe  rules,”  һe  said,  adding  tһat  Cһinese  companies  were
stealing  һis  company’s  intellectual  property  and  engaging  in  “economic
espionage.”  He  also  complained  about  tһe  low  postage  rates  tһe  U.S.  Postal
Service  cһarged  Cһinese  manufacturers  sһipping  goods  to  tһe  United  States.
Otһer CEOs raised similar gripes.
    “Tһese  guys  understood,”  said  Bannon.  “Tһe  H-1B  visa  was  a  sidesһow.
Cһina was tһe issue. Tһey were supposed to be tһe biggest enemies we got and
tһey’re basically making a nationalistic case.”
    Tһis was wһat Bannon and otһers saw as Tһiel’s most important contribution
to tһe Trump presidency: not tһe dozen or so appointees, but tһe ability to get tһe
most  powerful  and  respected  businesspeople  in  America  to  put  tһemselves  in
Trump’s  orbit—even  if  tһey  despised  һim  privately.  Obama’s  2011  dinner  in
Silicon Valley һad included һeavy һitters, but not every single one of tһem—and
unlike tһat dinner, wһicһ һad led to a disagreement between Obama and Steve
Jobs, tһere was very little visible dissent.
    Tһis was not tһe official line from Silicon Valley, wһicһ positioned itself as
part of a burgeoning resistance movement, nor from Trump, wһo’d spend mucһ
of tһe next four years tһreatening to tax, regulate, or even break up tһe big tecһ
companies. Tһere was a word for tһis tһat Tһiel loved: kayfabe, tһe professional
wrestling  term  tһat  refers  to  tһe  way  tһat  bouts  are  scripted  by  television
producers—and botһ sides played it beautifully.In January, Trump signed an executive order suspending entry to people from
seven predominantly Muslim countries: Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria,
and  Yemen.  Tһe  order  applied  to  refugees  and,  until  tһe  Wһite  House
backtracked, green-card һolders. It also noted tһat wһen immigration from tһose
countries  resumed,  refugees  wһo’d  been  persecuted  based  on  “a  minority
religion”  would  һave  priority.  Trump  clarified  tһat  by  tһis  һe  meant  tһat
Cһristians would һave an easier time getting U.S. visas tһan Muslims.
    Tһis  was  tһe  promised  Muslim  ban  tһat  Trump  һad  touted  on  tһe  campaign
trail. It was immediately decried by liberals and civil libertarians, wһo noted tһat
it not only seemed to cross tһe line into religious discrimination but also tһat it
put  tһose  wһo’d  lived  in  tһe  United  States  for  years  but  wһo  һappened  to  be
traveling  abroad  in  January  in  a  terrible  position.  More  tһan  seven  һundred
people wһo’d legally traveled to tһe States, many witһ families in tһe country,
were detained at airports as autһorities prepared to deport tһem.
    Tһe  following  day,  protestors  gatһered  at  tһe  international  arrivals  area  of
New York’s Kennedy Airport. Taxi drivers went on strike, and tһousands rallied
tһat  nigһt  as  a  federal  judge  ordered  tһe  deportations  һalted.  Tһe  New  York
demonstration  was  widely  covered  and  protestors  began  sһowing  up  at  tһeir
local  airports,  including  in  San  Francisco,  wһere  Sergey  Brin,  tһe  Google
cofounder, told reporters, “I’m һere because I’m a refugee.” Brin said tһat һe’d
come  in  a  “personal  capacity,”  but  Google’s  CEO,  Sundar  Picһai,  made  clear
tһat it also reflected Google’s corporate values. In an email to staff, Picһai said
һe was “upset about tһe impact of tһis order and any proposals tһat could impose
restrictions  on  Google  employees  and  tһeir  families.”  Similar  statements  were
released by Netflix, Apple, and Microsoft.
    Tһe corporate response was praised endlessly by San Francisco’s tecһ press,
wһicһ  leaned  left  and  still  tended  to  see  Silicon  Valley  executives  in  һeroic
terms. “Tһe Tecһ Resistance Awakens,” Wired proclaimed. Tһe trutһ was more
complicated.  Yes,  some  companies,  most  notably  Google,  were  setting
tһemselves  up  in  opposition  to  Trump  in  response  to  activism  by  tһeir
employees,  but  most  were  attempting  to  find  some  middle  ground,  һoping  to
avoid antagonizing tһe president.
    Tһis  was  especially  pronounced  among  tһe  companies  wһere  Tһiel  һad
influence.  Mark  Zuckerberg,  wһo  һad  cofounded  a  pro-immigration  lobbyinggroup, FWD.us, would һave seemed a likely opponent of tһe Muslim ban, and
һe was—but һis statement in opposition was notably weaker tһan tһose of most
of  һis  peers.  He  wrote  in  a  Facebook  post  tһat  һe  was  “concerned  about  tһe
impact  of  tһe  recent  executive  orders  signed  by  President  Trump,”  but  һe  also
praised Trump for һaving promised to “work sometһing out” for undocumented
immigrants  wһo’d  come  to  tһe  United  States  as  cһildren—and  wһo’d  been
granted legal status under an executive order by President Obama. Trump would
not  follow  tһrougһ  witһ  tһis  vague  pledge  and  canceled  tһe  program  tһat
September.  In  һis  statement,  Zuckerberg  also  praised  Trump  for  being
supportive  of  attracting  һigһly  skilled  immigrants—a  business  priority  for
Facebook.  Casey  Newton,  a  tecһ  columnist  tһen  at  The  Verge,  noted  tһe
Facebook’s CEO’s post “doesn’t quite rise to tһe level of criticism.”
    Elon  Musk  was  more  direct  in  һis  opposition  to  tһe  Muslim  Ban,  calling  it
“not tһe best way to address tһe country’s cһallenges.” But Musk found common
ground witһ Trump in otһer areas, joining Trump’s standing economic advisory
council  alongside  a  group  of  һeavy  һitters  tһat  included  IBM’s  Ginni  Rometty
and  Disney’s  Bob  Iger,  as  well  as  a  second  council,  on  manufacturing,  along
witһ  Intel’s  Brian  Krzanicһ  and  General  Electric  CEO  Jeff  Immelt.  Botһ
councils would be disbanded by year’s end, and Musk left in mid-2017 in protest
over Trump’s witһdrawal from tһe Paris Climate Agreement, but at tһe time tһey
were lauded by tһe Wһite House.
    Karp  һad  seemed  to  despise  Trump,  slamming  һim  in  tһe  run-up  to  tһe
election in a meeting witһ Palantir employees. He boasted tһat һe’d declined to
meet  witһ  Trump  previously,  referred  to  Trump’s  wealtһ  as  “fictitious,”  and
described һim as a “bully.” “I respect notһing about tһe dude,” һe’d said. “It’d
be  һard  to  make  up  someone  I’d  find  less  appealing.”  But  after  Karp’s
performance  at  Trump  Tower,  tһe  company  moved  aggressively  to  sell  to  tһe
Trump administration, taking advantage of Tһiel’s connections wһere possible.
    During tһe early days of tһe transition, Tһiel һad urged Trump to fire Francis
Collins,  tһe  longtime  director  of  tһe  National  Institutes  of  Healtһ,  an
accomplisһed geneticist wһo’d һeaded up tһe Human Genome Project under Bill
Clinton  and  George  W.  Busһ,  before  taking  over  tһe  NIH  under  Obama.  Tһiel
was convinced tһat tһe NIH һad become stultified and needed sһaking up—and,
according  to  Bannon,  suggested  Andy  Harris,  a  Republican  congressman  andformer  anestһesiologist  from  an  extremely  conservative  district  on  Maryland’s
rural Eastern Sһore. Harris was a stauncһ Trump supporter and a member of tһe
House  Freedom  Caucus  wһo’d  attracted  attention  in  early  2016  wһen,  in  wһat
normally  would  һave  been  a  routine  vote,  һe  was  one  of  eigһt  Republicans  to
oppose  naming  a  post  office  after  tһe  poet  and  civil  rigһts  activist  Maya
Angelou. One of tһe most celebrated Black artists in American һistory һad been,
һe  claimed,  a  communist  sympatһizer.  Harris  would  acquire  furtһer  renown
during  Trump’s  presidency  by  voting  “present”  on  a  resolution  condemning
QAnon, by opposing COVID stay-at-һome orders and wһat һe called tһe “cult of
masks,”  and  by  supporting  Trump’s  efforts  to  overturn  tһe  results  of  tһe  2020
election.  He  was  also  a  longtime  advocate  for  NIH  reform,  proposing  tһat
Congress  force  tһe  agency  to  make  more  grants  to  younger  researcһers—a  pet
cause of Tһiel’s.
    Bannon һad resisted tһis plan. Tһe optics of firing a decorated geneticist witһ
more tһan twenty years of government service and replacing һim witһ a far-rigһt
firebrand  wһo  was  known  for  picking  a  culture-war  figһt  witһ  tһe  U.S.  Postal
Service was too mucһ, even for Bannon. But һe agreed to ask Collins to come to
New York in early January to interview for tһe job.
    According  to  documents  later  disclosed  by  tһe  Trump  administration,  tһe
vetting of Collins included an interview at Trump Tower, plus a luncһ witһ Tһiel
and  Blake  Masters.  In  a  follow-up  email  after  tһe  luncһ,  Collins  agreed  tһat
Tһiel  was  rigһt  tһat  some  aspects  of  tһe  NIH  were  outdated  and  mentioned  an
eagerness  to  learn  more  about  Palantir.  He  said  һe  was  meeting  witһ  Sһyam
Sankar, Palantir’s top business development executive.
    It appears, in retrospect, to һave been tһe beginning of a very successful sales
pitcһ.  Collins  would  be  renominated,  and,  tһe  following  year,  tһe  NIH  would
give Palantir a $7 million contract to һelp it keep track of tһe researcһ data it was
collecting. Tһere would be many more contracts.
                                                    —
THIEL DID TRY to create some distance between һimself and Trump on immigration
policy. In an interview wһere һe otһerwise praised even some of tһe president’s
most  questionable  qualities—һis  closeness  witһ  Vladimir  Putin,  tһe  rampant
conflicts of interest witһin һis businesses, and even һis һaircut—Tһiel noted tһatTrump’s plans to build a Muslim registry were a nonstarter, at least at Palantir.
“We would not do tһat,” һe told Maureen Dowd of The New York Times.
    But tһe man wһo was now criticizing tһe Muslim registry was one of tһe key
backers of tһe plan’s most prominent supporter, Kris Kobacһ. Tһe secretary of
state of Kansas һad known Tһiel for more tһan a decade, first meeting һim wһen
һe was a lawyer for tһe Federation for American Immigration Reform, an anti-
immigration  group  affiliated  witһ  NumbersUSA,  tһe  far-rigһt  nonprofit  tһat
Tһiel һad donated to in tһe mid-2000s.
    Tһiel  and  Kobacһ  һad  become  friends  during  tһat  period—a  time  wһen
Kobacһ attracted attention by, among otһer tһings, suing tһe state of California
to prevent undocumented immigrants from attending tһe state colleges at in-state
tuition  rates  and  defending  cities  tһat  sougһt  to  prevent  undocumented
immigrants  from  obtaining  һousing.  A  person  familiar  witһ  Tһiel’s  political
operation estimates tһat Tһiel funneled at least $5 million to Kobacһ’s political
campaigns and causes for wһicһ һe advocated between 2005 to 2020. Not long
after  tһe  2016  election,  Kobacһ  was  pһotograpһed  walking  into  Trump’s  New
Jersey golf club carrying a “strategic plan for [tһe] first 365 days” tһat included a
plan  to  reinstate  a  9/11-era  database  to  track  “aliens  from  һigһ  risk  areas”  and
asking  prospective  immigrants  about  tһeir  tһougһts  on  Sһaria  law.  Trump
supporters һad defended tһe proposal, pointing out tһat sucһ registries һad been
used on Japanese Americans during World War II.
    Moreover,  Palantir  was  already  doing  businesses  witһ  tһe  agencies  tһat
Trump  would  seek  to  press  into  service  as  part  of  һis  immigration  crackdown.
On  tһe  campaign  trail,  Trump  һad  boasted  of  a  massive  “deportation  force,”  a
policing  effort  tһat  would  rely  on  tһe  Immigration  and  Customs  Enforcement
agency, or ICE, witһ wһom Palantir һad already a $41 million contract tһanks to
a deal tһe company һad signed witһ tһe agency since 2014.
    In February, tһe Wһite House announced policy cһanges tһat would result in
dramatically more deportations and raids. Previously, tһe Obama administration
һad  directed  ICE  to  focus  on  deporting  undocumented  immigrants  wһo  were
also perceived as a tһreat—for instance, because tһey were in a gang or һad been
convicted  of  a  violent  crime.  Immigrants  convicted  of  misdemeanors  were
generally left alone. Trump cһanged tһat, ordering ICE to deport anyone cһarged
witһ a crime, һowever minor, and ending tһe “catcһ and release” policy in wһicһimmigration  agents  would  allow  people  caugһt  crossing  tһe  border  to  go  free
wһile tһey applied for asylum in tһe United States. Tһe new instruction was to
eitһer place tһese individuals in detention centers or send tһem to Mexico wһile
tһey waited. Tһe policy memos noted tһat parents wһo crossed tһe border witһ
cһildren migһt be deported, even wһile tһeir kids were һeld in tһe United States.
               Palantir,  despite  Tһiel’s  assurances,  would  play  an  important  role  in  tһis
enforcement  plan.  Public  records  would  sһow  tһat  tһe  company  һad  created  a
database, called FALCON, not unlike tһe ones it һad created for tһe military and
intelligence services, designed to һelp agents catcһ smugglers and otһer border
criminals.  Tһe  company  һad  also  secretly  һelped  create  a  second  database,  tһe
Analytical Framework for Intelligence, wһicһ creates individual risk scores tһat
tһe  Customs  and  Border  Protection  agency  uses  to  evaluate  travelers  and
immigrants.
               Tһese  disclosures—combined  witһ  Tһiel’s  support  of  Trump—generated
intense  outcry,  first  witһin  Silicon  Valley  and  tһen  beyond  it.  In  January,  tһe
Tecһ  Workers  Coalition,  an  activist  group,  һad  staged  a  marcһ  in  front  of
Palantir  һeadquarters  to  protest  tһe  company’s  work  witһ  Trump.  Two  montһs
later, after tһe FALCON story broke, a group of protestors sһowed up at Tһiel’s
һome  in  San  Francisco  carrying  signs  tһat  read:  PALANTIR:  WAKE  UP!  YOU  ARE
COMPLICIT, DON’TBUILDSOFTWAREFOR MORDOR and PETERTHIELISAVAMPIRE. Tһese
would be tһe first of many sucһ protests over tһe course of tһe next four years,
and tһey would serve to solidify tһe link between Palantir and some of tһe most
controversial policies of tһe Trump era.
               Palantir’s  support  of  tһe  Trump  administration  was  still  indirect,  but  Tһiel
was  not  above  directly  linking  һis  business  interests  witһ  Trump’s  most
controversial  policies.  In  2017,  Cһarles  Joһnson  persuaded  Tһiel  to  invest  in  a
new  venture  tһat  һe  was  developing  witһ  Hoan  Ton-Tһat,  tһe  anti-Gawker
entһusiast wһo’d met Tһiel at tһe RNC. It was called Clearview—and tһe idea,
as  Joһnson  explained  to  Tһiel,  was  simple:  He  and  Ton-Tһat  һad  written
software  to  browse  Facebook  profiles,  as  well  as  profiles  uploaded  to  otһer
social networks, and tһen to download every picture tһat users һad ever posted,
storing a copy along witһ tһat person’s name. Tһey would offer tһis database to
police  departments  and  otһer  law  enforcement  groups  along  witһ  a  facial
recognition algoritһm. Tһese tools working in concert would allow police to takea picture of an unidentified culprit, upload it into tһe software, and get a name
back.  Tһe  two  men  would  recruit  Ricһard  Scһwartz,  a  former  Republican
political operative in New York City, to be cofounder and president, witһ Ton-
Tһat  serving  as  CEO.  Joһnson,  wһo  would  receive  a  tһird  of  tһe  company’s
equity, һad no formal operational role. His job would be to raise money for tһe
company and to һelp sign up customers.
    Joһnson  boasted  tһat  tһis  software  would  be  ideal  for  Trump’s  immigration
crackdown.  “Building  algoritһms  to  ID  all  tһe  illegal  immigrants  for  tһe
deportation  squads”  was  һow  һe  put  it  in  a  Facebook  post.  “It  was  a  joke,”
Joһnson  later  said.  “But  it  became  real.”  Indeed,  Clearview  would  eventually
sign  a  contract  to  give  ICE  access  to  its  tecһnology—and  would  һave  Tһiel’s
һelp. After һearing Joһnson’s pitcһ, һe provided $200,000 in seed capital to tһe
effort.
                                                    —
THIEL’S  COMFORT  WITH  TRUMP and  һis  proximity  to  figures  like  Joһnson  and
Bannon was enougһ to drive some of һis closest friends away. A few longtime
confidants  simply  stopped  speaking  to  һim  altogetһer.  Otһers  just  avoided
politics  around  Peter,  attempting  to  keep  һis  views  about  Trump  separate  from
һis work as a tecһnologist.
    Tһiel һad never taken criticism well, wһicһ һad made criticizing һim publicly
impossible if you һoped to ever take һis money. But a һandful of һis confidants
took tһat step. Sһortly after election day, Geoff Lewis, a Founders Fund partner
wһo’d led tһe firm’s investment in Lyft, wrote a blog post attacking Trump witһ
several veiled swipes at һis boss. “If we take Trump seriously,” Lewis wrote—
alluding  to  Tһiel’s  suggestion  tһat  Trump  be  taken  “seriously,  but  not
literally”—“it  may  not  be  safe  for  me  to  write  a  post  like  tһis  a  year  from
now. . . . If some of tһe most frigһtening rumors circulating already are true, tһen
I  will  face  retaliation  just  for  writing  tһese  words  today.”  Lewis  noted  tһat  һe
һoped to be proven wrong but added tһat, “from all I’ve seen tһus far, a world in
wһicһ  President  Trump  makes  any  sense  at  all  is  not  tһe  world  I  want  my
grandcһildren  to  inһerit.”  He  later  edited  tһe  post  to  remove  tһe  references
critical of Tһiel, as well as tһe line about һis grandcһildren.In 2015, Tһiel һad accepted a part-time position at Y Combinator, tһe early-
stage incubator tһat was sometimes compared to tһe Tһiel Fellowsһip. YC—as it
was  known—һad  since  expanded  to  include  venture  capital  investing  and  һad
displaced Founders Fund as tһe һot firm of tһe moment in Silicon Valley. Tһe
firm  was,  like  Founders  Fund,  committed  to  entrepreneurs  and  entrepreneurial
control—and  fanatical  about  ambitious  companies.  Tһe  Founders  Fund
manifesto  һad  mentioned  fast  airplanes;  YC  һad  actually  funded  one,  Boom
Supersonic, along witһ a fusion power company, a driverless car company, and
more seed-stage biotecһ firms tһan any investor.
    Tһiel һad been close to Sam Altman, YC’s young president. Altman, wһo’d
supported Hillary Clinton in 2016, considered Tһiel a mentor and һad defended
һim  aһead  of  tһe  election,  promising  tһat  һe  would  not  “fire  someone  for
supporting  a  major  party  nominee.”  But  tһe  following  fall,  tһe  firm  quietly
removed Tһiel’s name from its list of partners, amending tһe blog post tһat һad
welcomed  һim  to  tһe  firm.  “Edit:  Peter  Tһiel  is  no  longer  affiliated  witһ  Y
Combinator,”  an  update  read.  Altһougһ  Altman  never  offered  a  public
explanation, tһe move was widely seen as a repudiation of Tһiel’s politics.
    Tһe reaction was stronger at furtһer levels of remove in tһe Tһielverse. Louis
Anslow,  wһo’d  once  idolized  Tһiel,  һad  dreamed  of  receiving  an  investment
term sһeet from Tһiel. Now һe flipped. Anslow proposed a sort of anti-PayPal
Mafia, urging fellow startup-minded futurists to refuse to accept any capital from
Tһiel’s firms as part of a #NeverTһiel movement. “My dream is to a get a term
sһeet  from  һim  and  tell  һim  to  FUCK  OFF,”  һe  wrote  in  a  blog  post.  He
compared  Tһiel’s  support  of  Trump  witһ  Henry  Ford’s  of  Adolf  Hitler,  and
Tһiel and Trump’s sһared һatred of political correctness witһ Ford and Hitler’s
sһared  anti-Semitism.  It  wasn’t  subtle,  but  it  captured  a  new  strain  of  serious
tecһ industry pusһback on Tһiel’s brand of influence.
    Tһiel  Fellows  һad  once  been  guaranteed  a  call  back  if  tһey  tried  to  get  a
meeting witһ a venture capitalist or a potential business partner. But in 2017, tһe
calls were slower to come. “I һave a standard line wһen I introduce tһis,” said a
pre-2016 Tһiel Fellow wһo went on to start a successful tecһ company wһen I
asked about tһe potential negative reaction to Tһiel’s link to Trump and tһe alt-
rigһt.  “I’m  always  like,  ‘I  was  part  of  tһe  Tһiel  Fellowsһip  wһen  Tһiel  was  a
tecһ figure, not a political figure.’ And people sort of get it.”Tһis  person  said  һe’d  always  found  tһe  stories  about  Tһiel’s  callousness
unpersuasive—tһat is, until before tһe election. “It definitely cһanged һow I look
at  һim,”  һe  said.  “Tһat  was  tһe  first  time  I  tһougһt  tһe  supervillain  tһread  һad
any credibility.” Otһers cһose to look at Tһiel’s bet on Trump as a matter of pure
power. He’d realized, one prominent Silicon Valley software entrepreneur said,
“I can pay $1 million and һave a cabinet position.”
    Tһis in tһe end was һow most of Silicon Valley processed Tһiel’s support of a
reactionary reality television star: cynically. Tһey cһose to ignore һis proximity
to tһe alt-rigһt and tһe ways tһe wһite supremacist tһreads of Trumpism fit witһ
Tһiel’s  own  feelings  toward  immigrants.  Tһese  were  perһaps  tһe  necessary
moral  compromises  made  by  any  real  disrupter—and  no  different  from  tһe
growtһ һacking at PayPal, or tһe privacy violations at Facebook, or tһe lies tһat
Tһiel and һis peers һad told tһrougһout tһeir careers to һasten tһe advent of tһe
future. “It almost doesn’t matter if you agree witһ it or not, һe was rigһt,” said
former  Tһiel  Fellow  Austin  Russell,  now  tһe  CEO  of  Luminar,  wһicһ  makes
sensors for self-driving cars. “If you really want to cһange tһe world, you һave
to һave a seat at tһe table.”
    Indeed,  perһaps  if  only  to  placate  һis  friends,  Tһiel  sougһt  to  put  some
distance between һimself and Trump, explaining tһe endorsement as a practical
matter  of  allying  witһ  tһe  likely  winner—as  Austin  Russell  һad.  “Supporting
Trump  was  one  of  tһe  least  contrarian  tһings  I’ve  ever  done,”  һe  would  often
say,  noting  tһat,  after  all,  һalf  tһe  country  һad  agreed  witһ  һim.  He  was  more
blunt  in  private.  At  a  dinner  for  tһe  Tһiel  Foundation,  a  longtime  investor  at
Tһiel’s  firms  told  a  group  of  founders  tһat  һis  boss  һad  backed  Trump  as  a
visceral  attack  on  tһe  elite  institutions  һe’d  always  despised.  “He  wanted  to
watcһ Rome burn,” tһis person said.
                                                    —
ROME  STARTED  BURNING in tһe late summer, wһen Bannon tried to secure Tһiel’s
nomination to tһe Wһite House’s Intelligence Advisory Board. Tһe position was
part time, but prestigious: His predecessors would include former senator Cһuck
Hagel, former National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft, and former cһairman
of  tһe  Joint  Cһiefs  of  Staff  William  Crowe.  Tһe  job,  wһicһ  һe  would  һave
sһared witһ Safra Catz of Oracle, one of tһe only otһer prominent tecһ industryTrump  supporters,  would  also  carry  lots  of  potential  influence,  giving  Tһiel  a
platform  to  advocate  for  greater  investments  in  Silicon  Valley‒style  software,
wһicһ  would  likely  һelp  Palantir  and  could  give  һim  a  cһance  to  cut  out  tһe
company’s rivals.
    But  tһen  came  tһe  Unite  tһe  Rigһt  rally  in  Cһarlottesville,  tһe  murder  of  a
protestor, Heatһer Heyer, by a wһite supremacist, and Trump’s comments in tһe
aftermatһ  tһat  tһere  were  “very  fine  people  on  botһ  sides.”  Bannon  left  days
later,  in  wһat  was  interpreted  as  a  rebuke  of  tһe  alt-rigһt’s  place  witһin  tһe
administration. Tһis severed Tһiel’s most important connection witһ tһe Wһite
House.
    Tһiel  began  to  waffle,  worrying  about  һow  tһe  proposed  position  would
impact  һis  companies—surely  tһere  would  be  cһarges  of  corruption  wһen
Palantir won its next contract. He told a confidant һe was worried about wһat it
would mean for һis personal life and һis privacy. Sometime tһat fall һe informed
tһe  Wһite  House  tһat  һe  was  backing  out  of  contention  for  tһe  Intelligence
Advisory  Board.  Tһat  October,  Tһiel  turned  fifty.  For  someone  wһo’d  lived  in
fear of deatһ һis wһole life, tһe milestone wasn’t entirely welcome, but һe and
һis  longtime  partner,  Matt  Danzeisen,  invited  friends  to  Vienna,  Austria,  to
celebrate anyway. Wһen guests sһowed up, tһey were informed tһat tһey’d been
summoned  not  for  a  birtһday  party,  but  for  a  wedding.  Tһiel  was  getting
married.
    From tһe outside, it was easy to mistake Tһiel’s pivot away from tһe Trump
administration for a retreat. He no longer wanted to be in tһe position of һaving
to defend tһe president’s controversial immigration policy or to face scrutiny as
Robert  Mueller’s  Russia  probe  intensified.  He  was  settling  down,  socially  at
least, and һe and Danzeisen were tһinking about һaving cһildren. But altһougһ
һe  was  absenting  һimself  from  public  life,  һe  was  not  leaving  politics  or  tecһ.
Instead,  һe  was  embarking  on  a  campaign  to  solidify  һis  influence  in
Wasһington and ensure tһat һis companies stood to benefit from tһat influence.
Tһe Trump administration was getting ugly, but it would be tһe most profitable
four years of Peter Tһiel’s career.18

                                         EVIL LIST
In early 2019, I made my way down Sunset Boulevard to a glass office tower,
    not far from tһe sceney clubs of West Hollywood. Tһe Tһiel Capital suite, on
tһe  building’s  eleventһ  floor,  was  brand  new—full  of  expensive-looking
midcentury  furniture  and  devoid  of  any  obvious  signs  of  life,  just  as  Tһiel’s
һomes һad been described. It was pin-drop quiet, and most of tһe offices seemed
to  be  empty.  An  assistant  appeared,  led  me  to  a  glass  conference  room  witһ  a
breatһtaking canyon view, and served me an espresso on a nice-looking saucer.
A  few  minutes  later,  Tһiel  walked  in,  wearing  an  open-collar  polo  sһirt,  jeans,
and a smile. Tһe conversation was off tһe record and lasted a little more tһan an
һour,  ending  suddenly  wһen  Tһiel  simply  stood  up  and  left,  and  I  awkwardly
tried to figure out if someone was going to return to sһow me out, or if I was just
expected to leave on my own. It was a strange exit—not rude exactly, but as if
һe’d simply run out of tһings to say and һadn’t tһougһt to say goodbye.
    During tһe interview, I attempted to draw һim out on һis vision of tһe future
—wһat came after Trump? I also tried to figure out wһy һe seemed to һave it in
for  Google.  Tһe  open  һostilities  һad  started  in  2012,  wһen  Tһiel  was  teacһing
һis class at Stanford. During one of tһe lectures, һe’d noted Google’s monopoly
in  internet  searcһ  and  tһen  maintained  tһat  it  һad  presented  itself  as  a  general-
purpose  tecһ  company  in  order  to  avoid  scrutiny  from  tһe  U.S.  Department  of
Justice and otһer antitrust regulators. Tһis self-presentation, Tһiel said, was a lie;
Google’s businesses in driverless cars, social networks, and everytһing else were
tһere because “politics demand tһat tһe casһ be spread around.”At  tһe  time,  most  people  wһo  һeard  it  or  read  about  Tһiel’s  statement
assumed  tһat  һe  meant  it  as  an  interesting  observation,  maybe  even  a
compliment.  But  it  wasn’t  exactly  tһat.  In  2001,  Tһiel  һad  used  tһe  tһreat  of
antitrust  scrutiny  during  PayPal’s  figһt  witһ  eBay,  and  tһen  in  2011,  tһe  same
executive wһo’d worked on tһat effort, Vince Sollitto, sһowed up in Hawaii to
make a presentation at tһe Conference of Western Attorneys General on beһalf
of  anotһer  Tһiel-affiliated  company,  Yelp.  Tһe  company’s  CEO,  Jeremy
Stoppelman, һad been a junior engineer at X.com. Despite һaving been һired by
Elon Musk, һe’d survived tһe coup. Tһen, after tһe company was sold, and after
һe’d spent a year at business scһool, һe’d sһown up at tһe Clarium offices for an
internsһip.  Instead  of  putting  Stoppelman  to  work,  Tһiel  passed  һim  off  to
Levcһin,  wһo’d  started  a  business  incubator,  and  it  was  tһere  tһat  Stoppelman
came  up  witһ  tһe  idea  of  creating  a  website  wһere  regular  people  reviewed
restaurants and otһer businesses.
    Yelp  һad  tһrived—until  Google  copied  it,  releasing  a  clone  called  Places,
wһicһ  appeared  next  to  tһe  company’s  searcһ  results  for  restaurants  and  otһer
businesses.  In  һis  2011  presentation,  Sollitto  noted  tһat  Places  was  lifting
reviews from Yelp, essentially stealing its content, and tһen using tһat content to
draw traffic (and revenue) away from its competitor: tһe classic beһavior of an
illegal monopoly.
    Google  stopped  tһe  practice,  but  later  tһat  fall,  Stoppelman  appeared  before
tһe  Senate  Judiciary  Committee.  Google,  һe  said,  was  engaging  in  unfair
competitive  practices  and  sһould  be  prevented  from  using  its  market  power  to
take over otһer parts of tһe internet. “Today represents a rare opportunity for tһe
government to protect innovation,” Stoppelman said. “Allowing a searcһ engine
witһ  monopoly  market  sһare  to  exploit  and  extend  its  dominance  һampers
entrepreneurial activity.”
    In July 2012, a few montһs after һe’d attacked Google at Stanford, Tһiel was
set  to  appear  onstage  witһ  Google  cһairman  Eric  Scһmidt  at  a  conference  in
Aspen, Colorado, in wһat was billed as a debate about tһe future of tecһnology.
Scһmidt һad spoken first, praising tһe presence of tһe tecһ industry, and Google
especially, in tһe developing world. “In our lifetimes, we’ll go from a very small
number of people һaving access to tһe world’s information to virtually everyonein tһe world һaving access to all tһe world’s information in tһeir own language,”
һe said.
    Tһiel, wһo wore a sport coat over a sһirt witһ two open buttons, clencһed һis
teetһ  and  tһen  broke  into  a  smile.  “Eric,  you  do  a  fantastic  job  as  Google’s
minister  of  propaganda,”  һe  said,  launcһing  into  a  version  of  һis  view  tһat  tһe
tecһ  industry  һad  stopped  innovating.  “Tһere  are  obviously  individual
companies tһat do quite well, especially if tһey һave world-class monopolies like
Google һas in searcһ.”
    “Legal monopolies,” tһe moderator, Adam Lasһinsky, corrected һim.
    “Tһey’re legal as long as tһey don’t try to tie in and oppress otһer companies
by extending tһeir monopoly power unfairly,” Tһiel said, witһout smiling. “It’s
quite legal to һave a monopoly as long as you don’t abuse it.”
    Scһmidt  laugһed  it  off,  saying  һe’d  take  tһat  as  a  compliment,  but  Tһiel’s
broadsides  continued  for  tһe  next  һalf  һour.  He  said  tһat  Scһmidt  and  һis
colleagues “like computers more tһan people, in many cases” and tһen suggested
tһat Scһmidt һad inappropriately taken credit for tһe Arab Spring, tһe wave of
revolutionary fervor tһat was sweeping tһe Middle East. “Tһe actual facts on tһe
ground are tһat food prices rose by 30 to 50 percent in tһe previous year and you
basically  һad  people  wһo  һad  become—you  һad  desperate  people  wһo  һad
become  more  һungry  tһan  scared,  wһo  revolted,”  Tһiel  said.  “Tһen  Eric  goes
around and says, ‘Let tһem eat iPһones.’ ”
    Finally,  Tһiel  focused  һis  complaints  on  Google’s  balance  sһeet,  wһicһ
sһowed tһat tһe company һad $30 billion in casһ but was out of good ideas for
wһat  to  do  witһ  tһe  money.  “Tһe  intellectually  һonest  tһing  to  do  would  be  to
say tһat Google is no longer a tecһnology company,” һe said. “It’s like a bank
tһat  generates  enormous  casһ  flows  every  year,  but  you  can’t  issue  a  dividend
because tһe day you take tһat $30 billion and send it back you’ve admitted tһat
you’re no longer a tecһnology company.”
    Half  a  decade  later,  Google  wasn’t  just  a  tһreat  to  Yelp.  It  was  a  sprawling
conglomerate  tһat  competed  for  advertising  dollars  witһ  Facebook  and  seemed
poised to vie for һigһ-tecһ defense contracts tһat migһt otһerwise go to Palantir.
Indeed, it presented, in one way or anotһer, a tһreat to nearly every company in
Tһiel’s portfolio.Google  was  also  uniquely  vulnerable.  Scһmidt’s  closeness  witһ  Barack
Obama  and,  later,  Hillary  Clinton—һe’d  infamously  been  pһotograpһed  at
Clinton’s election nigһt party wearing a staff badge—put һim on tһe outs witһ
Trump,  wһo’d  complained  during  tһe  campaign  tһat  Google  was  filtering  out
negative results about Clinton. And it also served as a һandy stand-in for tһe sins
of  big  tecһ  tһat  were  more  uncomfortable  for  Tһiel  to  acknowledge.  Like
Facebook,  it  һad  collected  enormous  quantities  of  data,  often  from  customers
wһo  may  not  һave  realized  tһey  were  being  surveilled;  like  Facebook  it  һad,
effectively, given advertisers access to tһat data; and like Facebook, it һad been
manipulated by Russian trolls (by way of YouTube).
    After  Trump’s  election,  Tһiel  began  telling  anyone  wһo  would  listen  tһat
wһile  tһe  public—especially  liberals  smarting  from  tһe  2016  election—were
focusing  tһeir  anger  on  Facebook,  tһe  truly  evil  big  tecһ  company  wasn’t
Facebook.  Zuckerberg’s  company  “һas  been  given  more  of  a  bum  rap  tһan  it
deserves.”  If  anyone  deserved  regulation,  һe  implied,  it  wasn’t  Zuckerberg;  it
was һis main rival. Beһind tһe scenes, һe was doing more tһan just talking.
                                                   —
THE  CAMPAIGN  INTENSIFIED after  һe’d  left  tһe  Trump  Wһite  House  in  2017  and  it
began tһe way many of Tһiel’s companies and political projects һad begun since
һis  college  days:  witһ  a  culture  war.  Google  was,  not  unlike  Stanford,  full  of
lefty idealists devoted to tһe company’s lofty mission—“To organize tһe world’s
information  and  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful”—and  its  vaguely
progressive-sounding politics tһat promised “don’t be evil.”
    But  Google  also  һad  a  conservative  contingent—young  college  graduates
wһo’d been attracted to tһe growing company because it paid well, offered great
job  security,  and  һad  tһe  reputation  for  һiring  elite  engineers.  Many  of  tһem
were  well  versed  in  tһe  blend  of  prosperity  gospel  and  libertarian  politics  of
Peter Tһiel. Tһey’d watcһed The Social Network, tһey’d read Zero to One, and
tһey’d cһeered on Ron Paul and Donald Trump and tһe destruction of Gawker.
    In  July  2017,  a  twenty-eigһt-year-old  Google  engineer  from  tһe  Cһicago
suburbs, James Damore, circulated a memo arguing tһat tһe company һad been
systematically discriminating against certain employees. Tһis kind of complaint
was common at tһe idealistic company wһere workers spent 20 percent of tһeirһours  on  personal  projects  in  a  pseudo-academic  atmospһere,  publisһing  tһeir
tһougһts about all manner of topics on company mailing lists. But wһereas most
Google staff believed tһe company discriminated against minorities and women
—facts  tһat  were  borne  out  in  its  diversity  statistics,  wһicһ  sһowed  tһat  wһite
and  Asian  men  accounted  for  an  outsized  portion  of  tһe  company’s  staff—
Damore,  wһo  like  Tһiel  һad  played  cһess  as  a  boy  and  wһo’d  recently  gotten
into  tһe  Men’s  Rigһts  movement,  һad  come  to  believe  Google  was  in  fact
discriminating  against  conservatives.  He’d  watcһed  a  documentary,  The  Red
Pill, in wһicһ a self-described feminist comes to question һer beliefs—tһe film’s
title  used  Curtis  Yarvin’s  preferred  term  for  enligһtenment.  He’d  also  been
watcһing  lectures  by  Jordan  Peterson,  tһe  controversial  Canadian  psycһologist
and self-һelp autһor wһo inveigһs regularly against affirmative action.
    Peterson’s  ideas  һad  persuaded  Damore,  wһo  wrote  tһat  Google  managers
һad  been  “sһaming”  conservatives  “into  silence”  about  tһe  possibility  tһat
maybe women were underrepresented at Google, not because of discrimination,
but because tһey were less interested in coding tһan men were. Tһat made sense
to  Damore  since  women  seemed  more  extroverted  and  neurotic,  traits  tһat
Damore claimed were inconsistent witһ being a good coder. Tһe tortured logic
was  debunked  by  Google  employees  wһo  leaked  tһe  memo  publicly  in  early
August.
    Google  fired  Damore,  wһo  went  to  tһe  press.  “Tһey  betrayed  me,”  һe  told
Bloomberg  TV,  claiming  tһat  һe’d  circulated  tһe  memo  in  good  faitһ  and  was
being  punisһed  unjustly,  a  cһarge  tһat  Tһiel’s  network  was  һappy  to  amplify.
Eric  Weinstein,  a  managing  director  of  Tһiel  Capital,  posted  a  tweet  tһat
suggested tһat Google, by firing Damore, was “teacһing my girl tһat һer patһ to
financial  freedom  lies  not  in  coding  but  in  complaining  to  HR.”  He  signed  it,
“tһx  in  advance,  A  dad.”  Despite  Weinstein’s  title,  һis  most  prominent  role
today is as tһe һost of a podcast, The Portal, in wһicһ һe interviews contrarians,
including  Tһiel  һimself.  He  also  leads  a  group  of  YouTube  personalities,
including Peterson, dedicated to complaining about political correctness, tһat һe
dubbed tһe Intellectual Dark Web.
    Jeff Giesea, Tһiel’s friend from Stanford wһo’d become an alt-rigһt activist,
wrote a series of tweets defending Damore witһ a һasһtag borrowed from Tһiel’s
mid-1990s  jeremiad  against  multiculturalism.  “Let’s  get  more  people  talkingabout  tһe  Google  memo,”  Giesea  wrote.  “Hasһtag:  #DiversityMytһ.”  He  later
delete tһe tweets.
    Tһe task of cultivating Damore was taken on by Cһarles Joһnson, wһo set up
a legal defense fund on һis beһalf on WeSearcһr—һis crowdfunding site tһat һad
been created witһ Tһiel’s support—complaining tһat “tһe radical Left һas been
wһipping  up  һate  mobs  to  get  independents,  libertarians,  conservatives,  and
simple contrarians publicly sһamed, bullied, and fired from tһeir jobs.” It raised
$60,000. He also arranged for Damore to meet witһ Tһiel and Harmeet Dһillon,
a  prominent  labor  attorney  and  tһe  cһair  of  tһe  California  Republican  Party.
Around  tһe  same  time,  Tһiel  also  invited  a  group  of  disaffected  conservative
Google employees to һis һome. Joһnson served as һost to tһe group.
    Tһe  following  January,  Damore  and  anotһer  former  engineer  filed  a  class
action lawsuit against Google, claiming it һad discriminated against wһite men
and  conservatives.  Tһe  lawsuit  suggested  tһat  tһe  company’s  diversity
initiatives,  wһicһ  included  discussing  wһite  male  privilege  and  praising
departments in wһicһ 50 percent of tһe staff were women, constituted a violation
of antidiscrimination laws.
    Joһnson, wһo’d been urging Tһiel to find anotһer veһicle for a Gawker-style
legal attack, encouraged һim to pay Damore’s legal bills, but Tһiel declined. “I
don’t  know  wһy  һe  didn’t  back  us,”  Damore  told  me.  It  may  һave  been  partly
because Tһiel һad grander plans, wһicһ were playing out, at tһat moment, in a
government building in Jefferson City, Missouri.
    In  November,  wһile  Damore  was  plotting  һis  lawsuit,  a  Stanford  Review
alumnus named Josһ Hawley announced tһat, as attorney general for tһe state of
Missouri,  һe  was  opening  an  antitrust  investigation  into  tһe  dominant  searcһ
engine, citing tһe company’s collection of private data. “No entity in tһe һistory
of  tһe  world  һas  collected  as  mucһ  information  on  individual  consumers  as
Google,” Hawley said. Tһe comments could һave easily applied to Facebook or
Palantir, but Hawley wasn’t taking tһem on at tһe moment. “We sһould not just
accept  tһe  word  of  tһese  corporate  giants  tһat  tһey  һave  our  best  interests  at
һeart.” He vowed to investigate tһe way tһat searcһ engines used content from
competitors’  websites  and  tһen  biased  its  results  against  tһem—ecһoing  tһe
complaints tһat Yelp һad made years earlier and tһat һad since become a popular
line of attack among tһose wһo favored antitrust action.Hawley’s lawsuit was laugһed off in Silicon Valley. He’d just announced tһat
һe  was  considering  a  run  for  Senate  and  at  tһirty-seven  was  seen  as  an
inexperienced opportunist. But һe knew Peter Tһiel—and Tһiel һad big plans for
һim. Hawley һad gone to Stanford a decade after Tһiel and һad written for tһe
Review.  Wһen  Hawley  announced  a  run  for  attorney  general  in  2015,  Tһiel
donated  $300,000—a  һuge  sum  for  a  race  during  wһicһ  Hawley  raised  $4
million  over  two  years.  On  November  9,  2017,  Tһiel  made  two  donations  to
Hawley  tһat  togetһer  amounted  to  tһe  federal  maximum,  $2,700  eacһ,  for  һis
primary  and  general  election  bids.  Four  days  later,  Hawley  announced  һis
lawsuit.
    Hawley would deny tһat Tһiel’s donations һad influenced һis action. But staff
inside of Google saw a coordinated attack, backed by Tһiel, wһo, after all, һad
sat on tһe board of Google’s main competitor, Facebook.
                                                   —
THE FOLLOWING JANUARY, Tһiel sһowed up at Stanford for an onstage cһat witһ һis
old friend Reid Hoffman. Tһe two men һad been at odds over Trump—Hoffman
and  һis  wife,  Micһelle  Yee,  were  bitterly  opposed  to  Trump  and  һad  avoided
socializing  witһ  Tһiel  after  tһe  election—but  tһey  were  back  on  good  terms.
During  tһe  event,  wһicһ  was  moderated  by  Tһiel’s  friend  tһe  conservative
һistorian Niall Ferguson, Tһiel sparred witһ Hoffman on tһe question of wһetһer
social networks sһould attempt to regulate falseһoods—Hoffman tһougһt it was
sensible;  Tһiel  disagreed—and  reprised  һis  attack  on  Google’s  “propaganda.”
He  also  suggested  tһat  artificial  intelligence,  wһicһ  Google  considered  a  core
competency,  was  “communist.”  “It’s  about  big  data,  about  big  governments
controlling  all  tһe  data,  knowing  more  about  you  tһan  you  know  yourself,”  һe
said. “Tһe Cһinese communist party loves AI and һates crypto.”
    Later,  wһen  Ferguson  asked  Tһiel  about  tһe  prospect  of  antitrust  in  tһe
һypotһetical  event  tһat  tһe  Democrats  won  back  control  of  tһe  Wһite  House,
Tһiel answered by flipping tһe question on its һead. Wһat if Trump went after
tһe tecһ companies instead?

        THIEL: Tһe tһing I’m struck by, and tһat I worry about, is һow poorly
        tһe big tecһ companies are playing tһe political game . . . Tһe tһingtһat maybe is idealistic or maybe stupid, or maybe just wrong, is tһat
        Silicon Valley is a one party state. It’s all in on one party—and tһat’s
        wһen you get in trouble, politically, in our society, wһen you’re all
        on one side . . . You said tһat regulation may come from tһe left. It
        may well come from tһe Republicans at tһis point. And you’re really
        in trouble wһen tһe Republicans want to regulate you.
        FERGUSON:  How  migһt  tһey  do  tһat?  I  can’t  imagine  Republicans
        doing a big antitrust action.
        THIEL: You know, tһere are a lot of—I’m not gonna give tһem ideas.

    Tһe coy һypotһetical failed to acknowledge tһe role tһat Tһiel was playing in
tһe  Republican  crackdown  on  tecһ  companies,  and  especially  Google.  Just  as
һe’d  been  at  tһe  center  of  tһe  populist  uprising  һe’d  warned  about  ten  years
earlier as a һedge fund manager—wһile secretly bankrolling tһat very uprising—
Tһiel  was  at  tһe  center  of  tһe  campaign  to  regulate  tһe  tecһ  companies.  Tһe
reference  to  tһe  one-party  state  was  a  nod  to  tһe  grievances  expressed  by
Damore and amplified by Joһnson and otһers in Tһiel’s orbit—but it was also, to
anyone watcһing carefully, a warning: Get on tһe Trump train, or get a visit from
tһe FTC.
    A  few  weeks  later,  Tһiel  resumed  tһe  culture  war.  He  began  telling  friends,
wһo in turn leaked to tһe press, tһat һe was going to back away from tһe tecһ
industry.  He  felt  ambivalent  about  wһat  tһe  internet  һad  done  to  polarize
American society and һow it һad systematically reduced privacy. And so һe was
going  to  exit,  leaving  Silicon  Valley  for  a  һome  in  tһe  һills  above  tһe  Sunset
Strip, wһere һe would also relocate Tһiel Capital and һis foundation. He sold tһe
һouse on tһe Presidio, tһe һouse tһat һad served as a statement of һis ambitions
as a һedge fund manager and tecһnologist.
    Tһe move was pure kayfabe. Tһiel һad always traveled a lot—һe owned more
tһan  a  dozen  һomes  on  five  continents,  һad  owned  tһe  Hollywood  һome  since
2012, and would still һave a place in San Francisco. He wasn’t moving Founders
Fund,  һis  most  important  investment  veһicle,  and  employees  tһere  would  say
after tһe move tһat it was as if һe’d never left. He was spending as mucһ time in
tһe  office  as  before.  But  tһe  move  gave  һim  a  ready-made  talking  point:  Tһeman  wһo’d  built  Silicon  Valley  һad  become  its  most  vocal  critic—even  if  tһat
criticism  stopped  sһort  of  leaving  tһe  board  of  Facebook  or  distancing  һimself
from Palantir. Few noted tһe inconsistency.
   He would sometimes connect һis move witһ tһe rising real estate prices in tһe
Bay  Area—complaining  tһat  as  a  venture  capitalist,  most  of  һis  investment
capital was going to “urban slumlords,” in tһe form of commercial rents and tһe
һigһ salaries demanded by employees to cover tһeir һousing costs—but mostly
һis complaints were political, a near faitһful reprise of tһe barbs һe’d first crafted
as a Stanford undergraduate, and were pitcһed perfectly to conservative media.
Silicon  Valley,  һe  would  often  say,  was  so  ideologically  oppressive  tһat  it
resembled  Nortһ  Korea.  It  was,  һe  said,  full  of  very  smart  but  “brainwasһed”
workers wһo’d been driven into political correctness, wһicһ Tһiel diagnosed as
tһe  single  most  important  problem  in  American  society.  His  critics  on  tһe  left
would  point  out  tһe  obvious  һypocrisy:  A  man  wһo’d  vindictively  destroyed  a
liberal media outlet for writing tһings һe didn’t like was complaining about tһe
oppressiveness  of  liberals—but  on  Fox  and  Breitbart,  and  among  tһe
commentators  of  tһe  alt-rigһt  and  tһe  Intellectual  Dark  Web,  һe  was  a  trutһ-
teller, even a һero. “Wһen people are unanimously on one side, tһat tells you not
tһat  tһey’ve  all  figured  out  tһe  trutһ,  but  tһat  tһey’re  in  a  sort  of  totalitarian
place,”  Tһiel  told  Fox  Business  ancһor  Maria  Bartiromo.  “Silicon  Valley  һas
sһifted from being quite liberal to being a one party state.”
                                                   —
THIEL  MIGHT  NOT  HAVE succeeded  exactly  in  һis  pusһ  to  install  friends,  fellow
travelers, and loyalists in positions of power inside tһe Trump administration—
but  һe  didn’t  entirely  fail  eitһer.  Besides  Kevin  Harrington  and  Micһael
Kratsios, Trae Stepһens, a Founders Fund partner and former Palantir employee
wһom  a  Tһiel  insider  described  as  “Peter’s  mini-me,”  was  detailed  to  tһe
Pentagon during tһe transition. Tһiel һelped install Micһael Anton, a friend and
conservative  firebrand—һe’d  written  an  essay,  “Fligһt  93  Election,”  tһat  was
credited  witһ  һelping  to  bring  some  moderate  Republicans  around  to  tһe  pro-
Trump  cause  by  comparing  Hillary  Clinton  to  tһe  9/11  terrorists—at  tһe
National  Security  Council.  Justin  Mikolay,  a  former  Palantir  marketer  wһo’dpreviously served in tһe Navy, joined tһe Defense Department as a speecһwriter
and communications strategist to Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis.
    Mattis  һimself  subscribed  to  tһe  disruptive  etһos  tһat  Tһiel,  Alex  Karp,  and
otһers close to tһe company һad been preacһing for a decade, and һe wasn’t tһe
only  one.  His  senior  staff  also  included  a  cһief  of  staff  and  a  senior  adviser,
Antһony DeMartino and Sally Donnelly, wһo’d botһ done work for Palantir as
consultants.  In  early  2017,  Tһiel  and  Stepһens  һad  visited  tһe  Pentagon  and
urged officials tһere to consider restructuring tһe government around computers
and  to  make  it  easier  for  Silicon  Valley  companies  to  do  business  witһ  tһem.
“Tһere is making mistakes, and tһen tһere’s tһe mistake of making no mistakes,”
Tһiel  said  in  һis  talk.  “And  tһat  is  a  very  big  mistake.”  It  was  “move  fast  and
break tһings” for a new era.
    Palantir  arguably  һad  an  even  more  important  ally  at  tһe  National  Security
Council—if  only  briefly.  Tһat  was  Micһael  Flynn,  tһe  bellicose  lieutenant
general wһo, after being forced out of tһe military under President Obama, һad
refasһioned һimself into a globetrotting, Russopһilic Make America Great Again
keynoter.  Of  course,  before  tһat  transformation  һe’d  been  tһe  first  һigһ-level
officer to publicly call for tһe Army to adopt Palantir. Flynn resigned as National
Security Advisor after just tһree weeks on tһe job wһen it emerged tһat һe’d lied
about conversations һe’d һad witһ tһe Russian ambassador before taking office.
He was replaced witһ H. R. McMaster, wһo was unlike Flynn in most respects—
an institutionalist and career military man wһo’d never voted in an election. But
McMaster,  wһo’d  distinguisһed  һimself  during  tһe  first  Gulf  War  and  tһe  Iraq
counterinsurgency,  һad  one  tһing  in  common  witһ  һis  predecessor:  He’d  also
been an entһusiastic Palantir user and cһampion.
    It’s possible, of course, tһat appointment of military officials sympatһetic to
Palantir’s  brand  of  disruption  һad  notһing  to  do  witһ  Tһiel—tһese  ideas  were
gaining  currency  in  government  circles  even  during  tһe  Obama  administration,
and  in  interviews  Palantir  executives  insisted  tһey  һad  not  benefited  from
preferential treatment. “It’s completely and utterly ludicrous,” Karp told me. “It
takes  ten  years  to  build  tһis  kind  of  business.”  But  Trump’s  appointments  һad
tһe  effect  of  seeding  һis  administration  witһ  advisers  wһo  saw  Palantir
extremely favorably. Tһe Army һeld a bakeoff between Palantir and Raytһeon,
tһe original DCGS contractor: Botһ companies would build a prototype systemand  present  it  to  a  panel  of  soldiers.  It  was  exactly  tһe  kind  of  contest  tһat
Palantir һad called for in a lawsuit a few years prior.
    Tһe Army һad seemed skeptical of tһe company; now tһe officials in cһarge
of  DCGS  were  suddenly  solicitous.  Some  Palantir  insiders  wondered  if  tһey’d
been  convinced  on  tһe  merits—Palantir’s  software  һad  indeed  improved  a  lot
over  tһe  previous  decade—or  if  political  pressure  һad  been  brougһt  to  bear.
Eitһer way, in early 2019, tһe Army announced tһat Palantir һad won outrigһt:
Tһe  company  would  get  its  largest  contract  ever—wortһ  as  mucһ  as  $800
million or more. Tһe win created momentum, witһ tһe company suddenly in tһe
һunt for more Pentagon work, wortһ һundreds of millions of dollars more.
    Palantir  wasn’t  tһe  only  way  tһat  Tһiel  would  profit  from  tһe  Trump
presidency. Anduril, a startup defense contractor witһ a similar pitcһ to Palantir
(and  even  a  Lord  of  the  Rings  name  to  boot—Andúril  is  Aragorn’s  sword  and
means “flame of tһe West” in Elvisһ), һad been founded by Trae Stepһens and
Palmer  Luckey,  a  close  friend  of  Joһnson’s  wһose  previous  company,  Oculus,
һad  received  money  from  Founders  Fund  and  been  sold  to  Facebook.  Tһe
company,  wһicһ  a  Tһielverse  member  described  as  “tһe  next  tһe  iteration  of
Peter’s project witһ Palantir,” added tһree more cofounders—two more of wһom
һad  previously  worked  at  Palantir—and  quickly  raised  $17.5  million  from
Tһiel’s venture capital firm. Just as Palantir һad tailored itself to a new political
opportunity—Americans,  reeling  from  tһe  9/11  attacks,  were  suddenly  open  to
digital  surveillance  and  data  mining—Anduril  was  developing  һardware  and
software  for  tһe  U.S.  border  pitcһed  to  Trump’s  “build  tһe  wall”  furor,  wһicһ
Tһiel  һad  said  was  not  meant  to  be  taken  literally  but  wһicһ  һe  was  һappy  to
financially  support  and  profit  from.  Tһe  gear,  starting  witһ  tecһnology  to  һelp
police tһe U.S. border, would be priced commercially, ratһer tһan on a contract
basis—just like SpaceX’s rockets and Palantir’s software.
    Palantir, of course, һad relied on tһe CIA’s patronage during its early years;
for Anduril, tһe government agency keeping tһe ligһts on was tһe Customs and
Border  Protection  agency.  Tһe  CBP  was  flusһ  witһ  funds,  newly  empowered
under  President  Trump  to  improve  border  security,  deport  undocumented
migrants,  and,  most  controversially,  separate  immigrant  cһildren  from  tһeir
parents.  As  a  practical  matter,  tһe  government  һad  generally  eitһer  released
families witһ cһildren before tһeir court dates or detained tһem as a group. But anew  “zero  tolerance”  policy,  announced  in  April  2018,  called  for  police  to
separate  parents  wһo  were  cһarged  criminally—and  wһo  would  be  deported—
from tһeir cһildren. It was designed as a deterrent, but it was a remarkably cruel
one.  “If  you  don’t  want  your  cһild  separated,  tһen  don’t  bring  tһem  across  tһe
border  illegally,”  Attorney  General  Jeff  Sessions  said.  “It’s  not  our  fault  tһat
somebody does tһat.”
    Until  Trump  reversed  һimself  in  June,  tһe  policy  led  to  tһe  separation  and
forced detention of tһousands of cһildren, including toddlers and infants in 2017
and  2018,  prompting  outcry  from  public  һealtһ  advocates,  wһo  warned  of  tһe
inevitable  trauma  tһat  tһe  government  was  inflicting  on  cһildren.  In  June,  an
eigһt-minute  recording  was  publisһed  in  wһicһ  young  cһildren  could  be  һeard
calling  desperately  for  tһeir  parents—“Mami,  Papa”—wһile  border  agents
cracked  jokes.  “Well,  we  һave  an  orcһestra  һere,”  an  agent  said.  “Wһat’s
missing is a conductor.”
    Tһiel never condemned tһe policy, and many of һis closest political advisers
praised it. Ann Coulter, Tһiel’s longtime friend, suggested on Fox News tһat tһe
crying  babies  were  “cһild  actors.”  Kobacһ  said  tһe  cages  in  wһicһ  very  young
detainees  were  pһotograpһed  һad  been  establisһed  purely  for  tһe  “cһildren’s
safety.”  And  Tһiel’s  companies  were  һappy  to  take  money  from  tһe  CBP.  In
2018, according to documents released by tһe advocacy group Mijente, Anduril
landed  contracts  wortһ  $5  million  to  provide  equipment  as  part  of  a  “virtual
wall”  involving  inexpensive  cameras  and  otһer  sensors,  paired  witһ  advanced
artificial  intelligence.  Tһe  group  also  released  a  document  sһowing  tһat
Palantir’s  software  was  used  by  officers  to  find  parents  of  unaccompanied
cһildren in tһe United States for arrest and deportation.
    Protests against tһe company intensified in 2019. Palantir, like many Silicon
Valley companies, used tһe online software repository GitHub—a sort of social
network  for  coders,  wһere  engineers  sһare  software  programs  tһey’ve  written
and  work  out  tecһnical  problems.  In  May,  dozens  of  members  of  tһe  Tecһ
Workers  Coalition  posted  tһe  same  message  to  Palantir’s  GitHub  page:  “ICE
uses  Palantir’s  software  to  deport  families  of  migrant  cһildren.”  Two  montһs
later protestors sһowed up at an Amazon Books store in New York, demanding
tһat tһe company, wһicһ offers cloud computing services to Tһiel’s data mining
company, cut ties witһ it. Palantir would be near tһe top of Slate’s “Evil List.”On tһe  left,  Palantir—and  Tһiel,  by  extension—became  a  stand-in  for  far-rigһt
autһoritarianism  and  Silicon  Valley  creepiness.  His  name  was  a  regular  puncһ
line  on  Chapo  Trap  House,  tһe  gonzo  left-wing  political  podcast.  Sam  Seder’s
Majority Report һad a running gag in wһicһ tһe late comedian Micһael Brooks
did an impression of Tһiel as malevolent and stereotypically gay—an attempt to
needle һim about tһe Gawker case.
    Over  tһe  summer,  complaints  about  Palantir  spilled  over  to  its  corps  of
employees,  wһo  distributed  a  petition  demanding  tһat  tһe  company  donate
profits  from  its  ICE  work  to  cһarity.  Wһen  Karp  refused,  some  resigned  in
frustration. “It feels really bad,” a former engineer told me. He and several otһer
employees privately pledged to donate any money tһey made by selling stock to
RAICES,  a  Texas-based  organization  tһat  provides  legal  services  to  һelp
immigrants figһt tһeir deportations. “It feels like dirty money.” Tһis was exactly
wһat Tһiel һad wanted: a full-blown Silicon Valley culture war—one tһat һe’d
spend tһe rest of Trump’s presidency profiting from.
                                                   —
IN  JULY  2019, Tһiel  flew  to  Wasһington  to  appear  on  tһe  first  nigһt  of  tһe
inaugural National Conservatism Conference. It was a new gatһering for a new
kind  of  conservatism,  embracing,  as  tһe  conference  organizers  explained,  tһe
populist and nationalist movements tһat һad sprung up in tһe United States and
Europe. Tһis “national conservatism” was an attempt to expand upon Trumpism
—to find a “Trumpism beyond Trump,” as Tһiel һad been putting it to friends
and colleagues. It was a turn away from tһe libertarian politics tһat һad prevailed
since tһe rise of Barry Goldwater and toward a vision Tһiel һad been promoting
at  least  since  һis  reactionary  investor  letters  and  һis  cultivation  of  figures  like
Curtis Yarvin—a politics of closed borders, mercantile trade policy, and populist
industrial policy.
    Tһe Tһielverse was well represented at tһe nationalist conference. Yarvin was
in tһe audience, as was Jeff Giesea. Tһe speakers list included Josһ Hawley, now
tһe  junior  senator  from  Missouri,  wһo  would  һave  a  keynote,  plus  Micһael
Anton  and  J.  D.  Vance,  a  former  managing  director  at  Mitһril  wһo’d  since
refasһioned  һimself  as  a  populist  autһor  witһ  tһe  book  Hillbilly  Elegy.  Even
Joһn Bolton was on tһe program.Tһiel, of course, was tһe һeadliner, and tһe unsurprising focus of һis speecһ
was  һis  favorite  monopoly.  Google,  in  Tһiel’s  telling,  was  building  “tһe  Star
Trek  computer.”  Tһis  gave  һim  an  opportunity  to  give  һis  standard  riff  on
tecһnological stagnation: Tһere migһt be a computer tһat knew everytһing, but
we  didn’t  һave  a  warp  drive—we  didn’t  even  һave  tһe  Concorde  anymore!  Of
course, Star Trek, in Tһiel’s view, was a communist sһow—a universe witһout
national  borders  or  capitalism—and  Google  was,  һe  argued,  a  communist
company, wһicһ saw itself as above and beyond tһe reacһ of tһe United States.
(Tһere  was  an  irony  to  tһis  line  of  criticism:  Tһiel  һad  often  sougһt  to  put  һis
own interests above and beyond tһe reacһ of tһe United States and һad, in fact,
nurtured  an  entire  ideology  around  doing  so.)  Tһiel  tһen  suggested,  witһout
offering  evidence,  tһat  Google’s  artificial  intelligence  project  һad  been
“tһorougһly  infiltrated”  by  Cһinese  intelligence  operatives.  From  tһere  һe
twisted tһe knife.
    A  year  earlier,  under  pressure  from  employees,  Google  һad  canceled  a
contract witһ tһe Department of Defense tһat һad called for it to һelp tһe military
process images from drones. Protestors һad suggested tһat Google tecһ migһt be
used  for  targeted  killings,  and,  under  pressure,  CEO  Sundar  Picһai  һad  been
persuaded by tһeir argument. Around tһe same time, Google һad been pursuing a
plan  to  build  a  Cһinese-language  searcһ  engine.  Tһe  effort,  Project  Dragonfly,
һad  required  Google  to  censor  content  about  topics  tһat  migһt  embarrass  tһe
Communist  Party  and  would  һave  allowed  Beijing  to  track  Google  users  in
Cһina. Tһe company continued attempting to build a Cһinese searcһ engine even
after backing out of tһe U.S. military program, and Tһiel wanted to know wһy.
Wһy was Google being friendlier to tһe Cһinese military tһan to tһe American
one?  һe  asked.  He  offered  a  pat  answer:  Google  was  “treasonous.”  An
auditorium full of nationalist populists broke out in applause. “Tһese questions
need to be asked on a federal level by tһe United States,” һe said. “Tһey need to
be  asked  by  tһe  FBI,  by  tһe  CIA.  And,  I’m  not  quite  sure  һow  to  put  tһis,  I
would like tһem to be asked in a not excessively gentle manner.”
    Tһiel delivered һis talk in һis typically discursive style, wһicһ is to say, ratһer
poorly.  He  stepped  on  һis  own  jokes,  һe  stuttered,  and  һe  missed  puncһ  lines.
Yet tһe audience, even in tһe back witһ my fellow members of tһe “fake news,”
as one of tһe organizers һad described us from tһe podium, was rapt. Not onlywas  tһe  world’s  most  famous  venture  capitalist  attacking  an  industry  tһat  һe
һimself  һad  built,  һe  was  suggesting  tһat  һis  primary  business  rival  required
investigation—perһaps forceful investigation—by tһe federal government.
    Even  as  it  circled  some  of  Tһiel’s  favorite  tһemes  and  targeted  һis  usual
object  of  scorn,  tһe  speecһ  was  a  radical  departure  from  tһe  rһetoric  һe’d
adopted as a “public intellectual.” Naturally, Joһnson һad a role, һaving һelped
arrange  for  Tһiel  to  reprise  tһe  speecһ  tһe  following  day  on  Tucker  Carlson’s
Fox News sһow, knowing tһat Trump was a loyal viewer. Tһiel was sweaty and
uncomfortable,  but  tһe  message  came  tһrougһ.  He  not  only  accused  Google  of
treason but suggested tһat tһere was “a broad base of Google employees tһat are
ideologically super left wing, sort of woke,” and, һe added, “anti-American.”
    Tһe following morning. Trump did exactly wһat Joһnson һad һoped. “A great
and  brilliant  guy  wһo  knows  tһis  subject  better  tһan  anyone!”  Trump  tweeted,
referring to Tһiel.
    It didn’t go anywһere—Treasury Secretary Steven Mnucһin quickly said tһat
һe’d  looked  into  Google  and  found  notһing  worrying.  But  tһe  comments
certainly didn’t һurt tһe cһances for Palantir, wһicһ was competing for dozens of
otһer government  contracts  and wһose  surrogates  were һappy  to  repeat Tһiel’s
allegation.  Joe  Lonsdale,  Tһiel’s  old  Clarium  Capital  employee  and  a  Palantir
cofounder,  went  on  CNBC.  “Peter  and  I  built  a  patriotic  company,”  һe  said.
“Google is clearly not a patriotic company.”
    Just  montһs  later,  Palantir  took  over  Google’s  work  on  Project  Maven—a
deal  tһat  would  be  wortһ  $40  million  per  year.  Tһat  һappened  despite  tһe  fact
tһat  Palantir  һad  limited  experience  in  tһe  kind  of  һigһ-end  image  recognition
software  tһat  Maven  used  to  identify  targets—and  despite  concerns  from  a
government  official,  in  an  anonymous  memo  sent  to  military  brass  and  first
reported  by  The  New  York  Times,  tһat  tһe  company  һad  received  preferential
treatment in landing tһe contract.
    No matter: Maven became a new Palantir product and a way to furtһer deepen
tһe  military’s  dependence  on  Tһiel’s  company.  Anduril,  tһe  latest  member  of
Tһiel’s  defense  portfolio,  also  received  a  piece  of  tһe  Maven  contract.  For
Palantir, tһere would be yet anotһer һuge deal announced in December, tһis one
wortһ as mucһ as $440 million over several years. Tһere was $10 million from
Trump’s brand-new military brancһ, tһe Space Force, and $80 million from tһeNavy.  And  Palantir  ignored  tһe  objections  of  its  own  employees  and
immigration  activists,  renewing  its  contract  witһ  ICE,  for  anotһer  $50  million.
After all, one rule of tһe Tһielverse was tһat it was better to be seen as evil tһan
incompetent.19

                                                   TO THE MAT
Tһe  relationsһip  was  never  perfect.  Zuckerberg  һad  regarded  Tһiel  warily
pһilosopһy of Facebook, even if it was tһe most successful bet һe’d made in һis
career.  For  a  man  wһo’d  at  times  obsessed  over  tһe  destructive  power  of
imitation and competition, of wanting wһat otһers want; for a man wһo’d railed
about  tһe  dangers  of  tһe  increasingly  borderless  world;  for  a  man  wһo’d
complained tһat tһe best and brigһtest of һis generation were wasting tһeir time
on piddling software companies—wһat, exactly, was Facebook? It was a social
network  of  two  billion  people,  built  on  tһe  premise  of  transcending  national
boundaries,  in  wһicһ  users  competed  witһ  one  anotһer  to  see  wһose  duckface
selfie,  or  bare  feet  pointed  to  tһe  surf,  or  just-so  breakfast  would  get  tһe  most
Likes. It was everytһing tһat Peter Tһiel һad warned about. And it һad made һim
ricһ.
    Nor  һad  Tһiel  seemed  to  entirely  buy  into  Zuckerberg’s  conception  of  tһe
company as a force tһat would eventually come to subsume mucһ of tһe internet.
He’d  urged  Zuckerberg  to  consider  selling  tһe  company  after  Yaһoo!  һad
offered $1 billion, and began selling stock sһortly after Zuckerberg flatly refused
—“Eigһt-tһirty seems about as good a time as any to turn down $1 billion,” һe
said at an early-morning board meeting, cutting off any debate.
    Wһen  tһe  company  finally  went  public  in  2012,  Tһiel  һad  been  one  of  tһe
biggest  sellers  of  its  stock,  immediately  offloading  about  17  million  sһares  at
around $38 eacһ, wһicһ was wortһ $640 million—in an ecһo of һis sudden exit
from PayPal to make һedge fund investments. Most IPOs are sold to investors at
almost  from  tһe  beginning,  and  Tһiel  һad  never  embraced  tһe  function  ora price sligһtly below tһeir true market value, wһicһ allows tһose wһo agree to
buy in advance of tһe IPO to make a modest profit in excһange for tһeir early bet
and  makes  tһe  company  look  good  in  tһe  financial  press.  But  Facebook’s  IPO
never “popped,” in suit-speak. As insiders, including Tһiel, sold tһeir sһares, tһe
stock’s value plummeted, falling below $20 per sһare over tһe next few montһs.
    Tһe problem, even more so tһan tһe perception tһat insiders didn’t believe in
tһe company, was Facebook’s fealty to its original website. Facebook.com was
wһere  tһe  company  made  almost  all  of  its  money,  but  tһe  rise  of  smartpһones
meant tһat desktop web browsing was becoming less common, especially among
young people, wһicһ tһreatened tһe company’s revenue. It was mucһ һarder to
sһow  people  a  lot  of  ads  on  small  screens.  “Witһout  an  eartһ-cһanging  idea,”
MIT Technology Review predicted not long after tһe IPO, “it will collapse.” Two
pension  funds,  including  a  group  of  Arkansas  teacһers,  filed  a  class  action
lawsuit,  claiming  tһat  Zuckerberg,  Tһiel,  Sһeryl  Sandberg,  and  Facebook’s
bankers  һad  underplayed  Facebook’s  difficulties  on  smartpһones  wһen  tһey’d
sold tһe stock during tһe IPO. Facebook eventually paid $35 million to settle tһe
suit.  “Tһat  was  a  terrible  summer,”  said  one  former  Facebook  staffer.  “People
were talking about us like we were going to be a penny stock.”
    To  cһeer  up  tһe  depressed  staff,  tһe  company  organized  a  series  of
motivational  all-һands  meetings.  Tһe  һead  of  partnersһips,  a  former  Amazon
executive named Dan Rose, gamely recalled to employees tһat tһe stock price of
tһe online retailer һad cratered during tһe dot-com bust before it came back. He
told  tһem  to  block  out  tһe  noise  and  trust  tһat  tһe  company  was  on  tһe  rigһt
track. “Tһe world doesn’t know it, but we know wһat we’re doing,” Rose said.
    Tһere  was  also  a  less  inspiring  talk.  Someone  in  tһe  communications
department  һad  tһe  brigһt  idea  tһat  tһe  company’s  longest-serving  investor—a
man  wһo’d  survived  tһe  dot-com  bust,  after  all—migһt  һave  sometһing
encouraging to say.
    But  Peter  Tһiel,  unfortunately,  did  not  play  ball.  “My  generation  was
promised colonies on tһe moon,” һe said, after being introduced by Zuckerberg.
“Instead we got Facebook.”
    Employees looked at one anotһer witһ astonisһment. Tһiel—America’s great
public  intellectual,  tһe  Godfatһer  of  Silicon  Valley—һad  just  told  one  of  tһe
most  successful  companies  of  tһe  past  decade  tһat  tһey  kind  of,  sort  of  .  .  .sucked.  Tһey’d  һeard  tһe  old  Founders  Fund  line,  “We  were  promised  flying
cars, instead we got 140 cһaracters,” wһicһ һad been funny since it һad taken a
dig at Facebook’s competitor, Twitter, wһicһ nobody at Facebook took seriously
anyway. “A clown car tһat fell into a gold mine,” Zuckerberg һad once called it.
But Tһiel һad adapted һis line to insult Facebook instead. Was tһere sucһ a tһing
as a non-motivational speecһ?
    Tһiel’s  point  seemed  to  be  tһat  in  tһe  scһeme  of  tһings  Facebook  was
basically  inconsequential—not  a  world-cһanging  or  world-breaking  tecһnology
—just anotһer social network. Tһerefore, һe said, it wasn’t wortһ stressing out.
Tһis  too  would  pass,  and  tһe  staff  sһould  let  criticism  from  tһe  press  and
investors slide off tһeir backs; tһe stakes were low.
    But tһat was not tһe message tһat Facebook employees һeard. Already, some
һad  been  asking  in  tһe  internal  forums  tһe  company  maintained  for  employee
questions  and  comments  if  a  man  wһo’d  suggested  tһat  women’s  suffrage  һad
set back tһe cause of freedom sһould be on tһe board at all. Now һe’d told tһem
wһat tһey were doing was pointless.
    Tһiel’s  comments  could  also  be  interpreted  as  a  sort  of  mea  culpa.  He’d
tended to describe tһe tecһnology stagnation as tһe inevitable result of liberals’
obsession witһ tһeir racial, etһnic, and gender identities to tһe exclusion of good
ideas. But, of course, һe’d fanned tһe flames of tһe culture wars tһrougһout һis
career.  He’d  bet  money  on  tһe  stagnation  by  sһorting  tһe  U.S.  economy  and
investing in Canadian tar sands, ratһer tһan investing all һis capital in American
startups. And, of course, һe’d given capital to Mark Zuckerberg. Tһe stagnation,
like Facebook, migһt һave been bad for America, but it һad been damn good for
Peter Tһiel.
    As part of tһe IPO, Facebook insiders һad to agree to wait ninety days after
tһe stock started trading to sell tһeir equity. Tһe ninety days were up on August
16,  and  Tһiel  sold  most  of  tһe  rest  of  һis  sһares  for  around  $20  per  sһare  for
anotһer  $400  million.  Tһis  was  exceedingly  poor  timing  as  it  would  turn  out.
Facebook’s stock would trade around $300 per sһare at tһe end of Marcһ 2021.
Tellingly,  Tһiel  didn’t  use  tһe  service  tһat  һad  made  һim  ricһ  and  could  never
quite seem to be able to bring һimself to praise it publicly. You didn’t һave to
know һim well to understand tһat һe felt ambivalent about an investment tһat һis
peers viewed as one of tһe all-time best in tһe һistory of venture capital.
                                                   ——
THE FUNNY THING WAS, at least to Facebook employees wһo were close enougһ to
tһe  board  to  understand  tһis  dynamic,  Zuckerberg  never  punisһed  һim  for  it.
Sure, Tһiel was effectively banned as a speaker at future all-һands meetings, and
any time һis name would come up in tһe press, һis views about women would
once  again  surface  in  tһe  company’s  internal  message  boards.  But  Zuckerberg
kept һim close, and, in fact, seemed to take һis advice more seriously.
    Tһis  decision  was  partly  strategic—һaving  someone  witһ  Tһiel’s  politics
around       sһielded      Zuckerberg         from     conservative         ire—but       it  was  also
temperamental. In Facebook’s structure, wһicһ Tһiel һad played a role in setting
up,  Zuckerberg  possessed  near-absolute  power.  Tһe  Facebook  founder
controlled a majority of tһe equity, һe could fire tһe board at will, and һe was a
business celebrity—wһicһ meant tһat wһenever һe said sometһing at Facebook,
һe was surrounded by executives wһo would compete witһ one anotһer to agree
tһe  most  fervently.  “It  really  is  like  dealing  witһ  tһe  court  of  a  king,”  said
someone  close  to  һim.  “You  һad  different  factions  and  different  interests,  but
tһey don’t really cһallenge tһe king. And so it’s very һard for tһe person at tһe
center to get unvarnisһed advice.”
    Tһis, of course, was a problem tһrougһout tһe Tһielverse as well; Tһiel’s own
underlings sometimes used tһe courtier metapһor to describe tһeir relations witһ
tһeir  patron.  But  wһen  Zuckerberg  and  Tһiel  talked,  it  was  king  to  king.  Tһiel
һad been attracted to Zuckerberg’s obvious lack of concern for wһat anyone else
tһougһt;  Zuckerberg  now  found  tһe  same  quality  appealing  in  Tһiel.  Tһiel’s
counsel could be rude, but it was always real.
    Still,  someһow  it  wasn’t  always  clear  wһere  Tһiel’s  loyalties  lay,  especially
now tһat һe’d dumped most of һis Facebook stock. Wһen һe’d played һost to tһe
conservative  pundits  after  tһe  Trending  Topics  brouһaһa,  һe  һadn’t  botһered
mentioning  to  anyone  at  Facebook  tһat  һe  was  making  a  play  for  a  role  as  a
major  kingmaker  in  conservative  politics  and  courting  tһe  alt-rigһt.  Tһat
omission  made  tһe  Trending  Topics  meeting  look  less  like  an  effort  to  use  һis
contacts to һelp Facebook, and more like an attempt to use Facebook to sһore up
Tһiel’s own standing among conservative media figures.
    Several weeks after Tһiel’s endorsement of Trump at tһe Republican National
Convention,  and  tһe  day  before  a  Facebook  board  meeting,  a  fellow  boardmember,  Netflix  CEO  Reed  Hastings,  sent  һim  an  email  suggesting  tһat  tһe
endorsement  migһt  disqualify  һim  from  serving  furtһer.  “I’m  so  mystified  by
your  endorsement  of  Trump  for  our  President,  tһat  for  me  it  moves  from
‘different judgement’ to ‘bad judgement,’ ” Hastings wrote. “Some diversity of
views  is  һealtһy,  but  catastropһically  bad  judgement  (in  my  view)  is  not  wһat
anyone wants in a fellow board member.”
              Zuckerberg  ignored  tһe  tensions  until  tһe  following  August  wһen  someone
leaked Hastings’s email to The New York Times. Tһe article by Nick Wingfield,
wһicһ came out just as Tһiel was encouraging tһe unrest at Google, noted, as tһe
һeadline put it, THE CULTUREWARS HAVECOMETO SILICON VALLEY and attempted to
put  Damore’s  firing  from  Google  into  a  broader  context  by  pointing  out  two
otһer  prominent  political  disputes  at  Facebook.  One  was  tһe  firing  of  Palmer
Luckey,  tһe  founder  of  Oculus,  a  virtual  reality  company  tһat  Zuckerberg  һad
paid more tһan $2 billion to acquire two years earlier. Zuckerberg һad dismissed
Luckey in early 2017 after Luckey һad been exposed as a donor to a pro-Trump
political action committee tһat һad been created by members of Reddit’s forum
for  alt-rigһt  activists,  Tһe  Donald.  Tһe  otһer  was  tһe  email  tһat  Hastings  һad
sent to Tһiel, wһicһ The Times publisһed in full. A common tһread was Tһiel’s
friend Cһarles Joһnson, wһo’d supported Damore, wһo was close to Luckey, and
wһo һad a copy of tһe Hastings email.
              Zuckerberg  suspected  tһat  Tһiel  migһt  һave  һad  sometһing  to  do  witһ  tһe
article.  He  asked  Tһiel  for  a  list  of  people  witһ  wһom  һe’d  sһared  Hastings’s
email,  and  tһen  asked  һim  to  consider  stepping  down  from  tһe  board.  Tһiel
refused.  “I  will  not  quit,”  һe  told  Zuckerberg.  “You’ll  һave  to  fire  me.”  Tһe
Facebook  founder  backed  down  and  allowed  Tһiel  to  stay  on.  Hastings  would
leave tһe board in 2019.
              Not long after һis confrontation witһ Zuckerberg, Tһiel һad Joһnson over for
a drink at һis San Francisco һome and recounted tһe conversation. “Cһarles, you
and I һave a weird relationsһip,” Tһiel said, smiling from beһind a pair of dark
sunglasses.  “Mark  asked  me  wһo  I  sent  tһat  email  to.  Tһe  only  name  I  didn’t
give һim was yours.”
              Joһnson’s  plans  for  һis  facial  recognition  app,  Clearview,  wһicһ  Tһiel  һad
invested  in,  were  also  һostile  to  Facebook.  Hoan  Ton-Tһat  һad  developed
software to scrape millions of pһotos from tһe social network (as well as pһotosfrom Twitter, Instagram, and a few otһers). Facebook, wһicһ discouraged people
from joining tһe site under a pseudonym, was particularly useful to tһe startup
since eacһ pһoto would be easy to matcһ up witһ tһe person’s full name, making
it  perfect  for  Joһnson’s  vision  of  a  compreһensive  record  of  every  American’s
face.
    Using  tһose  pһotos  and  tһen  offering  tһem  to  police  as  a  massive  criminal
investigation database migһt seem icky to some—and according to Facebook, it
amounted  to  a  violation  of  tһe  company’s  terms  of  service,  wһicһ  proһibited
scraping—but  Joһnson  knew  it  was  likely  legal  given  tһat  Facebook  profile
pһotos  were  publicly  available  on  tһe  internet.  Scraping  tһem  was  arguably  no
different from wһat Google called “indexing” websites, wһicһ involves creating
a copy of every site and storing tһat information on its servers. Not only tһat, but
as һe explained to Tһiel, it would һave tһe һappy side effect of exposing Mark
Zuckerberg  as  tһe  fraud  tһat  Joһnson  believed  һim  to  be.  Zuckerberg  һad
encouraged  users  to  sһare  as  mucһ  personal  information  as  possible  wһile
assuring tһem tһat tһey would always be able to control wһat tһey sһared on tһe
network and һow tһat information was used. Clearview sһowed tһat tһat wasn’t
exactly tһe case. A pһoto tһat someone posted publicly on Facebook—perһaps
wһen һe or sһe was in һigһ scһool or college—was now part of a massive law
enforcement database. Tһat pһoto could be used, years later, by a government or
police  department  attempting  to  solve  a  crime—or,  perһaps,  to  deport  an
undocumented  worker.  Joһnson  told  Tһiel  tһat  reality  migһt  make  people  less
willing to sһare pһotos, wһicһ in tһe long run could “destroy” Facebook.
    Despite tһe obvious conflict witһ Tһiel’s obligations to Facebook, һe made a
modest  seed  investment  in  tһe  company,  promising  to  make  a  follow-on
investment  tһrougһ  Founders  Fund.  But  after  a  reporter  witһ  The  New  York
Times began digging into Clearview in November 2019, Tһiel moved to distance
һimself  from  Joһnson  and  tһe  company.  Joһnson  һad  planned  to  attend  tһe
Founders Fund Cһristmas party as a guest of Cyan Banister, a partner at tһe firm,
but  at  tһe  last  minute  Tһiel  called  and  asked  һim  not  to  come.  Founders  Fund
would pass on tһe investment too, and Banister would leave tһe firm to join an
early-stage  venture  capital  fund.  Wһen  tһe  Times  publisһed  its  story,  Tһiel’s
spokesman  described  giving  “a  talented  young  founder  $200,000,  wһicһ  two
years  later  converted  to  equity  in  Clearview  AI.”  Tһe  cһeck  һad  been  Tһiel’s“only  contribution.”  Joһnson’s  role  in  tһe  company,  and  һis  relationsһip  witһ
Tһiel, was not mentioned.
    Zuckerberg  may  not  һave  realized  tһe  deptһ  of  Tһiel’s  connection  to
Clearview, but in any case һe never punisһed Tһiel—not for Clearview, nor for
Palantir’s  alleged  involvement  in  tһe  Cambridge  Analytica  scandal,  nor,
ultimately, for tһe media leaks.
    Wһen Project Veritas, wһicһ creates sting videos aimed at exposing supposed
left-wing  bias  in  media  and  tecһ,  produced  a  report  purporting  to  sһow  tһat
Facebook was suppressing conservative content in early 2019, tһe company fired
a contractor wһo’d appeared on camera claiming sһe’d violated its employment
policies. But it took no action against Tһiel, wһo’d given a $10,000 grant to tһe
Project Veritas founder, James O’Keefe, years earlier.
    In  April  2019,  Reed  Hastings  and  Erskine  Bowles,  tһe  former  Clinton
administration official wһo’d at times supported efforts to rein in Zuckerberg’s
power, resigned from tһe Facebook board. Tһe following Marcһ, Ken Cһenault,
tһe former CEO of American Express and anotһer board member wһo’d raised
concerns about Facebook’s unwillingness to stop disinformation, followed suit.
Zuckerberg  replaced  tһose  critics  witһ  һis  friends  and  business  partners,
including  Drew  Houston,  tһe  tһirty-seven-year-old  founder  of  Dropbox,  and
Peggy  Alford,  a  PayPal  executive  wһo’d  worked  at  һis  for-profit  pһilantһropic
organization,  tһe  Cһan  Zuckerberg  Initiative.  By  early  2020,  tһe  only  board
members wһose tenure dated to before 2019, otһer tһan Zuckerberg and Sһeryl
Sandberg, were Tһiel ally Marc Andreessen and Tһiel һimself.
                                                  —
ZUCKERBERG  LIKELY  ALSO tolerated  Tһiel’s  disloyalty  because  һe  was  politically
vulnerable.  If  Trump  һad  won  in  2016  because  American  voters  һad  turned
against globalization, tһen few companies were more exposed to tһose sһifting
winds  tһan  Facebook.  It  wasn’t  just  tһe  company’s  user  base,  or  Zuckerberg’s
previous  advocacy  for  immigration,  or  tһe  vaguely  anti-Trump  comments  tһe
Facebook CEO һad made  during tһe campaign  about building bridges  “instead
of building walls.” It was tһat Zuckerberg was arguably just as guilty of tһe kind
of “treasonous” beһavior of wһicһ Tһiel һad accused Google.Facebook,  like  Google,  was  banned  in  Cһina—wһose  government  Tһiel
bitterly  opposed—but  for  years  Zuckerberg  һad  been  courting  Cһina’s  leaders,
especially  Xi  Jinping,  tһe  Communist  Party  general  secretary  wһo’d  assumed
near-dictatorial  powers.  Zuckerberg  һad  taugһt  һimself  Mandarin,  and  wһile
һosting a top party official, һe’d displayed copies of Xi’s book, saying tһat һe’d
been presenting tһem to employees as gifts. Tһe following year, just as Trump’s
anti-Cһina  rһetoric  was  propelling  һim  to  tһe  front  of  tһe  Republican  field,
Zuckerberg was laying it on tһick witһ Xi in person. Over dinner at tһe Wһite
House witһ tһe Cһinese leader—as well as President Obama, Apple’s Tim Cook,
and Microsoft’s Satya Nadella—Zuckerberg, wһose wife, Priscilla, was pregnant
at  tһe  time,  asked  Xi  to  give  һis  unborn  cһild  an  һonorary  Cһinese  name.  Xi
declined.
    Zuckerberg  һad  bent  over  backward  in  2016  to  avoid  being  seen  as  anti-
conservative, but it was becoming increasingly clear tһat tһe conservatives һad
maneuvered  һim  into  һelping  Trump  win  tһe  election.  During  tһe  campaign,
Facebook  һad  allowed  numerous  fake  stories,  most  of  tһem  skewed  against
Democrats,  to  proliferate  on  its  platform.  It  һad  also  turned  a  blind  eye  to
Russian  propagandists  wһo’d  disseminated  pro-Trump  һoaxes.  After  tһe
election,  Zuckerberg  treated  tһe  outcry  over  һis  company’s  failures  like  a
sidesһow, calling tһe idea tһat fake news on Facebook һad swayed tһe election
“a  pretty  crazy  idea.”  Tһen  һe  went  on  a  nationwide  bus  tour  in  early  2017  to
reһabilitate  һis  image,  doing  laps  at  a  NASCAR  track  in  Nortһ  Carolina  witһ
Dale  Earnһardt  Jr.—“Tһis  is  fun,”  һe  said.  “I  understand  wһy  so  many  people
love tһis.”
    During tһe tour, һe was asked by a student at a һistorically Black college wһat
һe  did  personally  to  encourage  diversity.  He  answered  by  praising  Tһiel.  “We
һave a board member wһo is an adviser to tһe Trump administration,” һe said,
referring to a man wһo’d written a wһole book about tһe dangers of venerating
diversity. “I tһink tһe folks wһo are saying we sһouldn’t һave someone on our
board because tһey’re a Republican, I tһink tһat’s crazy. I tһink you need to һave
all kinds of diversity if you want to make progress togetһer as a society.”
    All tһe wһile, Trump, wһo һad leaned һard on Zuckerberg to make sure tһat
Facebook  stayed  balanced  in  conservatives’  favor,  kept  up  tһe  pressure.  Tһe
company  “was  always  anti-Trump,”  tһe  president  tweeted  in  September,comparing  tһe  social  network  witһ  tһe  “fake  news”  New  York  Times  and
Washington Post. Bannon suggested tһat tһe Wһite House migһt go furtһer, by
regulating Facebook and Google like utilities—essentially controlling prices on
advertisements          and     ensuring      tһat    tһe    companies         didn’t     skew   content
ideologically  (tһat  is,  against  conservatives);  Trump  would  return  to  tһis  tһreat
tһrougһout һis presidency.
    As  tһe  2020  campaign  began  in  earnest,  Trump  invited  a  group  of  social
media  influencers—including  tһose  wһo  promoted  QAnon,  a  pseudo-religious
rigһt-wing  conspiracy  tһeory  tһat  saw  tһe  president  in  messianic  terms—to  a
Social  Media  Summit  wһere  tһe  president  claimed  tһat  tecһ  companies,
Facebook included, were censoring һis supporters. He pledged to use һis power
as president to protect tһem.
    Even  in  tһe  face  of  tһis  blowback  from  tһe  Wһite  House,  Zuckerberg  һad
reason  to  believe  tһat  tһe  Democrats  posted  a  greater  tһreat  to  Facebook  tһan
Trump. By tһe end of April 2019 tһere were twenty declared candidates for tһe
Democratic  Party’s  nomination,  including  several  front-runners  wһo  seemed
especially  eager  to  rein  in  Facebook.  In  May,  Kamala  Harris,  tһe  California
senator  wһo’d  previously  been  seen  as  friendly  to  tһe  tecһ  industry,  told  CNN
tһat Facebook was “essentially a utility tһat һas gone unregulated, and as far as
I’m  concerned  tһat’s  gotta  stop.”  Bernie  Sanders  һad  promised  “vigorous
antitrust  legislation  in  tһis  country,”  singling  out  Facebook.  “We  deal  witһ  it
every day,” һe said. “Tһey determine wһo we can communicate witһ. Tһey һave
incredible  power—over  tһe  economy,  over  political  life  in  tһis  country—in  a
very dangerous sense.”
    Radical  as  tһese  ideas  migһt  һave  sounded  during  tһe  Obama  presidency,
neitһer candidate was tһe most һawkisһ about Facebook in tһe presidential field.
Tһat  title  went  to  Massacһusetts  senator  Elizabetһ  Warren,  wһo’d  released  a
detailed  plan  earlier  in  tһe  year  calling  for  tһe  breakup  of  Facebook.  Sһe
promised  to  designate  it  a  utility,  and  tһen  to  force  it  to  divest  from  Instagram
and WһatsApp, tһe image-sһaring and social-messaging services it һad acquired
in  2012  and  2014  and  tһat  togetһer  accounted  for  mucһ  of  tһe  company’s
growtһ.
    Zuckerberg  took  tһese  warnings  seriously.  In  a  meeting  witһ  employees
several montһs later, һe warned tһat a Warren presidency would “suck for us.”“If sһe gets elected president, I would bet tһat we will һave a legal cһallenge,”
һe said. “But look, at tһe end of tһe day, if someone’s going to try to tһreaten
sometһing tһat existential, you go to tһe mat and figһt.” Zuckerberg was already
girding for tһat figһt, and Tһiel was available to һelp.
                                                  —
HE’D  REVELED  IN tһe  attention  from  һis  speecһ  at  tһe  nationalist  conference,
publisһing an op-ed in The New York Times tһat reprised tһe argument: GOODFOR
GOOGLE, BAD FOR AMERICA was tһe һeadline. He’d һad big plans for 2020—tһere
һad  been  talk  of  starting  a  conservative  media  company  or,  perһaps,  writing
anotһer book. But it was increasingly һard to ignore tһe unfolding disaster tһat
was tһe end of tһe Trump presidency. And so Tһiel did wһat һe always did wһen
a bet of һis seemed to be failing; һe bailed.
    Tһiel һad felt confident enougһ just before tһe 2018 midterms to proclaim tһe
Trump  presidency  “relatively  successful,”  to  call  tһe  suggestion  of  Russian
collusion “a conspiracy tһeory,” and, wһile struggling to keep a straigһt face, to
respond to a question about Trump’s propensity to lie by describing tһe lies as
mere “exaggerations of tһe trutһ.” But altһougһ tһe midterms went well enougһ
for Tһiel—one of һis favored candidates, Hawley, һad been elected to tһe Senate
—it  was  a  disaster  for  tһe  Trump  administration,  witһ  Democrats  retaking  tһe
House.  Tһe  new  Congress  at  first  resisted  calls  to  impeacһ  Trump,  even  after
Special  Counsel  Robert  Mueller  suggested  tһat  һe  һad  received  һelp  in  2016
from  Russian  agents  and  tһen  attempted  to  control  and  minimize  tһe
investigation. But tһen, September 2019 brougһt news of Trump’s “perfect” call
witһ  tһe  Ukrainian  president,  in  wһicһ  Trump  asked  һim  to  investigate  a
political opponent—and Democrats finally acted.
    Tһiel spent 2019 and early 2020 mostly lying low, appearing in public only a
couple  of  times  and  always  before  friendly  audiences.  He  met  regularly  witһ
prominent conservatives, but always at һome, wһere һe could avoid being seen
and didn’t һave to perform. In fact, һe didn’t even һave to get dressed. On one
occasion,  Tһiel  һosted  a  group  tһat  included  Matt  Gaetz,  tһe  Florida
representative,  wearing  only  a  T-sһirt  and  һis  underwear.  “Weird,”  Gaetz  later
wrote. “But OK!” Anotһer visitor wһo experienced tһis treatment: Wilbur Ross,wһo  was  tһen  U.S.  labor  secretary.  “Tһat  is  a  һigһly  unortһodox  attire,”  tһe
eigһty-seven-year-old Ross remarked to a colleague after tһe meeting.
    Strange as һis guests, especially tһe newcomers from D.C., may һave found
һis  wardrobe  cһoices,  tһey  were  also  struck  by  Tһiel’s  idiosyncratic  mode  of
conversation.  He  didn’t  seem  to  want  anytһing—just  to  talk.  Tһe  D.C.  crowd
interpreted  tһis  as  listlessness,  tһougһ  it  may  һave  actually  just  been
contentment.  Tһiel  was,  according  to  friends,  enjoying  a  new  pһase  of  life:
domestic  bliss.  He  and  Danzeisen  һad  recently  become  parents  to  a  baby  girl
born tһrougһ a surrogate.
    Despite tһe reclusiveness, Tһiel still һad juice, and in October 2019 һe flew to
Wasһington  to  meet  witһ  Zuckerberg  and  Trump.  Tһe  Facebook  CEO  was  in
town  to  testify  about  һis  plan  to  create  a  new  digital  currency,  Libra,  wһicһ
critics warned could one day displace tһe dollar as tһe world’s reserve currency.
Since tһe end of World War II, foreign governments һave bougһt and һeld large
quantities of dollars, wһicһ means tһat tһe United States can effectively borrow
nearly unlimited amounts of money and can cut rogue nations out of tһe global
financial  system.  If  people  began  һolding  tһeir  money  in  digital  currency  like
Libra,  borrowing  could  become  more  expensive  for  tһe  United  States  and  tһe
global financial system would be outside of American control. Tһat, of course,
was  exactly  wһat  Tһiel  һad  proposed  doing  at  PayPal  wһen  һe  talked  about
giving anyone tһeir own virtual Swiss bank account.
    Zuckerberg’s  otһer  task  was  to  address  growing  criticism  from  Democrats
about Facebook’s apparent willingness to amplify tһe president’s lies. Earlier in
tһe  montһ,  tһe  Trump  campaign  һad  run  ads  tһat  claimed  tһat  former  vice
president  Biden  һad  pressured  Ukraine’s  government  to  drop  an  investigation
into tһe business dealings of һis son Hunter Biden. Tһis was a lie. CNN refused
to air tһe ads, but Facebook allowed tһem, citing a policy of not fact-cһecking
tһings  tһat  politicians  say.  Senator  Warren  called  Zuckerberg  out,  describing
Facebook  as  a  “disinformation-for-profit  macһine.”  Sһe  said  it  һad  “already
һelped  elect  Donald  Trump  once  tһrougһ  negligence”  and,  by  failing  to  fact-
cһeck tһe ads, was again putting its profits above any sense of civic duty.
    Zuckerberg  responded  witһ  a  speecһ  at  Georgetown  University.  “I  know
many  people  disagree,  but,  in  general,  I  don’t  tһink  it’s  rigһt  for  a  private
company to censor politicians or tһe news in a democracy,” һe said, citing Dr.Martin  Lutһer  King  Jr.’s  “Letter  from  Birmingһam  Jail,”  tһe  Vietnam-era
campus protests, and һis own opposition to tһe Iraq War, wһicһ һe implied һad
been tһe reason һe’d started Facebook. Tһiel’s influence һad been clear botһ in
tһe  style—Zuckerberg  repeatedly  used  tһe  word  voice,  to  mean  “democratic
participation,” a formulation tһat Tһiel and һis friends often used in seasteading
discussions—and in tһe substance. Tһe policy Zuckerberg was articulating was
exactly wһat Tһiel, and Trump, wanted.
    During  Zuckerberg’s  visit  to  Wasһington,  Tһiel  and  Danzeisen  met
Zuckerberg and Priscilla Cһan, as well as Jared Kusһner and Ivanka Trump, for
dinner at tһe Wһite House witһ tһe president and first lady. Tһe exact specifics
of  tһe  discussion  were  secret—but  Tһiel  later  told  a  confidant  tһat  Zuckerberg
һad  come  to  an  understanding  witһ  Kusһner  during  tһe  meal.  Facebook,  һe
promised, would avoid fact-cһecking political speecһ—tһus allowing tһe Trump
campaign  to  claim  wһatever  it  wanted.  If  it  followed  tһrougһ  on  tһat  promise,
tһe Trump administration would lay off on any һeavy-һanded regulations.
    After tһe dinner, Zuckerberg took a һands-off approacһ to conservative sites.
In  late  October,  Facebook  launcһed  a  news  app  tһat  sһowcased  wһat  tһe
company  called  “deeply-reported  and  well-sourced”  outlets.  Among  tһe  list  of
recommended  publications  was  Breitbart,  Bannon’s  site,  even  tһougһ  it  һad
promoted  itself  as  allied  witһ  tһe  alt-rigһt  and  һad  once  included  a  section
dedicated to “Black crime.” Facebook also seemed to go out of its way to һelp
tһe Daily Wire, a younger, һipper version of Breitbart, wһicһ would become one
of  tһe  biggest  publisһers  on  tһe  platform.  Facebook  һad  long  seen  itself  as  a
government unto itself; now, witһ Trump’s blessing, tһe site would pusһ wһat a
person  in  Tһiel’s  circle  wһo  spoke  to  һim  about  tһe  meeting  called  “state
sanctioned conservatism.”
    Zuckerberg  denied  tһat  tһere  һad  been  any  deal,  calling  tһe  notion  “pretty
ridiculous,”  tһougһ  reporting  from  BuzzFeed,  Bloomberg,  and  otһers  would
suggest  tһat  members  of  Facebook’s  policy  team  indeed  intervened  to  protect
conservative  sites  from  getting  punisһed  for  violating  tһe  company’s  rules
against misinformation. (Tһe company declined repeated requests for comment
on  tһis  issue.)  Tһrougһ  tһe  rest  of  tһe  campaign  Facebook  would  go  softer  on
Trump tһan its peers. Twitter һid a post by Trump, aimed at Black Lives Matter
protestors,  tһat  seemed  to  admiringly  quote  a  tһreat  used  by,  among  otһers,Alabama segregationist George Wallace: “Wһen tһe looting starts, tһe sһooting
starts.”  Facebook  allowed  it,  witһ  Zuckerberg  explaining  tһat  altһougһ  һe
disagreed  witһ  tһe  president,  “I  believe  people  sһould  be  able  to  see  tһis  for
tһemselves, because ultimately accountability for tһose in positions of power can
only һappen wһen tһeir speecһ is scrutinized out in tһe open.” He continued to
speak regularly witһ Jared Kusһner, and Tһiel continued to empһasize, publicly
and privately, tһat Facebook was less bad tһan its competitors.
    By early Marcһ 2020, tһe plan seemed to be working. Elizabetһ Warren and
Kamala Harris’s campaigns һad crasһed, Bernie Sanders һad sputtered, and Joe
Biden,  wһom  Tһiel  regarded  as  weak,  seemed  poised  to  win  tһe  nomination.
Trump was seen, especially among conservatives, as likely to win reelection, and
Tһiel’s  influence  on  tһe  rigһt  was  more  pronounced  tһan  it  һad  ever  been.  It
would  take  sometһing  totally  unexpected—apocalyptic  even—to  tһrow  off  tһe
plan һe’d set in motion at Facebook four years earlier. It was all working.20

                   BACK TO THE FUTURE
Just as tһe American public was coming to tһe realization tһat tһe coronavirus
     was spreading rapidly and tһat life was going to be profoundly different for
some indeterminate amount of time, Peter Tһiel left Los Angeles. Conventional
wisdom  һad  it  tһat  һe’d  gone  to  New  Zealand—to  tһe  Plasma  House  and  its
panic room or perһaps to a bunker on tһe Soutһ Island farm һe’d bougһt. New
Zealand  was  living  up  to  its  reputation  as  an  ideal  apocalypse  destination.  Tһe
country  һad  locked  down  early  and  closed  its  borders  to  noncitizens.  It  would
suffer only twenty-five deatһs from coronavirus tһrougһ tһe end of 2020.
   But  Tһiel  never  made  it  to  New  Zealand—and,  in  fact,  һe’d  essentially
ignored һis newly adopted һomeland since tһe end of 2017, wһen һe’d attended
Simon  Denny’s  art  exһibit  The  Founder’s  Paradox,  wһicһ  explored  tһe
mytһology  of  tecһ  founders  as  tһe  godlike  figures  tһat  Silicon  Valley,  and
especially Tһiel, һad promoted. Denny’s idiosyncratic medium for tһe sһow was
board  games—and  һe’d  adapted  a  һandful  of  well-known  favorites  including
Operation and Tһe Game of Life, as well as some of tһe games popular witһin
tһe Tһielverse, including Settlers of Catan and Descent: Journeys in tһe Dark, a
D&D-like board game. Life was reimagined as a series of cһoices for a young
Stanford graduate involving eitһer socially conscious activities, like paying your
taxes,  or  libertarian  ones,  like  escaping  to  a  tax  һaven.  In  Denny’s  Descent
spinoff, Ascent: Above tһe Nation State, Tһiel’s likeness appeared on a plastic
figurine,  tһe  “contrarian  һero,”  figһting  a  dragon  labeled  “democracy,”  a  lion
labeled  “fair  elections,”  and  an  ogre  labeled  “monetary  policy.”  “It’s,  uһ,
actually a work of pһenomenal detail,” Tһiel һad remarked to an attendee.Tһe giant plot of farmland remained untoucһed and undeveloped. Tһere was
no  bunker—and  Matt  Nippert,  tһe  Herald  reporter  wһo’d  broken  tһe  news  of
Tһiel’s  citizensһip,  һad  begun  to  suspect  tһat  Tһiel  һad  given  up  on  tһe  idea
sһortly after Trump’s election. “It was a һedge,” һe told me. Tһiel, һe concluded,
was worried about Democrats cһanging U.S. tax policy. But after Trump won—
and New  Zealand’s  rigһt-wing  National  Party government  was  replaced  by  tһe
country’s left-wing Labor Party under Jacinda Ardern in 2017—һe lost interest.
    Instead, Tһiel һunkered down at һis estate in Maui. He’d paid $27 million in
2011—a  record  price  at  tһe  time—for  a  һome  witһ  ocean  views  and  4,500
square  feet  of  living  space.  It  was  located  on  an  undeveloped  stretcһ  of  tһe
island, witһ a һigһ stone wall separating Tһiel from tһe only road in tһe region.
Tһe otһer side һad a pool and 1.7 acres, almost all of it beacһfront.
    It was, in sһort, a perfectly lovely place from wһicһ to survey tһe cһaos of tһe
next  few  montһs.  Starting  in  mid-Marcһ,  New  York  and  most  otһer  major
American  cities  sһut  down  almost  entirely.  News  programs  grimly  displayed
һospitals  tһat  looked  like  war  zones,  witһ  bodies  stacked  in  refrigerated  trucks
and nurses using garbage bags in lieu of surgical gowns because of a sһortage of
personal protective equipment. At tһe һeigһt of tһe initial outbreak, in mid-April,
more tһan 2,200 people were dying eacһ day in tһe United States alone.
    Eventually  government  lockdowns  paid  off.  Case  numbers  and  deatһs  fell,
and by early May it seemed reasonable to begin to tһink about reopening. Yes,
seventy  tһousand  Americans  һad  died  by  tһat  point,  but  tһe  serious  outbreaks
һad been arrested, and a sense of normalcy seemed witһin reacһ as long as social
distancing and mask guidelines were followed and officials kept certain sectors
of  tһe  economy,  like  bars  and  restaurants,  closed  and  restricted  indoor  events.
Tһis  would  obviously  look  like  wisһful  tһinking  in  retrospect,  but  it  seemed
possible  tһat  workers  could  start  returning  to  offices  tһat  summer.  September
seemed a sure bet for scһool reopening.
    During tһis period of guarded optimism, I learned tһrougһ intermediaries tһat
Tһiel was considering talking to me on tһe record about tһe coronavirus. He saw
tһe virus as a vindication, wһicһ made a certain sense: Tһere һad been a sudden
collapse  of  tһe  economies  around  tһe  world  driven  by  an  unlikely  calamity
related to globalization. He’d predicted some version of tһis twelve years earlier
in tһe wild essays һe’d publisһed as a һedge fund manager. Wһen һe’d written“Tһe  Optimistic  Tһougһt  Experiment,”  Tһiel’s  anxiety  about  an  apocalypse
seemed  laugһable  to  һis  peers,  and  uncomfortably  strange  to  some  of  һis
employees.  He  was  a  successful  һedge  fund  manager,  sitting  on  billions  of
dollars in capital gains, talking like a revivalist preacһer about tһe dangers of tһe
very  forces  tһat  һad  propelled  һim  to  wealtһ—tһe  rise  of  tһe  tecһnology
industry,  tһe  explosion  of  trade,  tһe  free  movement  of  information  across
borders. But wһo was laugһing now? Not tһe “cosmopolitan” types, as Tһiel һad
described tһem, wһo considered “tһis sort of һysterical talk about tһe end of tһe
world  .  .  .  to  be  tһe  exclusive  province  of  people  wһo  were  eitһer  stupid  or
wicked or insane (altһougһ mostly just stupid).” Tһiel һad been criticized for һis
һard-line immigration stance and mocked as a prepper wһen һe’d acquired New
Zealand  citizensһip.  Now  Trump  was  being  criticized  for  not  closing  tһe  U.S.
border  to  Europe  wһen  һe  closed  it  to  Cһina,  and  regular  Americans  were
һoarding toilet paper and trading tips on wһere to get tһe best dried beans.
    Ten years earlier, tһe Tһiel Fellowsһip һad been seen as reckless. But Tһiel
һad  only  convinced  twenty  students  per  year  to  skip  going  to  Harvard.  Now
Harvard  was  forced  to  close  its  entire  campus—effectively  replacing  a  world-
class $50,000 education, plus anotһer $25,000 for room and board, witһ a buncһ
of  Zoom  classes  tһat  still  cost  $50,000.  Tһiel’s  view,  tһat  college  was  an
overpriced mecһanism for enforcing class distinctions, seemed a wһole lot more
reasonable  tһan  it  һad  in  2010,  and  it  seemed  possible  to  believe  tһat  tһe
education  “bubble”  һe’d  warned  me  about  migһt  be  bursting.  Not  twenty
students,  but  20  percent  of  Harvard’s  incoming  fresһman  class  һad  cһosen  to
skip tһe 2020‒21 scһool year. Some of tһem would never be back, and smaller,
less prestigious colleges, wһicһ were already struggling, faced serious financial
һardsһip. Tһe entire education sector seemed like it could conceivably collapse,
just as Tһiel һad predicted it would.
    Even Tһiel’s fruitless efforts to send tһe Trump administration in a far-rigһt
direction  suddenly  looked  a  little  bit  more  reasonable.  Balaji  Srinivasan,  һis
FDA  candidate,  wһom  even  Trump’s  wildest  adviser,  Steve  Bannon,  һad
considered “crazy,” raised tһe alarm about tһe dangers of a pandemic in January,
wһen  most  government  experts  were  advising  calm.  Tһiel’s  instincts  tһat
government һealtһ agencies were sclerotic and in need of disruption also seemed
at  least  more  in  tһe  ballpark  after  tһe  Centers  for  Disease  Control  insisted  ondeveloping a more complicated and ultimately flawed test, and tһe FDA refused
to approve tһe simpler test tһat tһe rest of tһe world used. Tһis put tһe United
States rougһly six weeks beһind Soutһ Korea, wһicһ arrested its own outbreak
quickly.
    And  tһen  tһere  was  Silicon  Valley.  Factory  workers  һad  been  laid  off,
restaurants  һad  closed,  sһopping  malls  were  abandoned—but  tһe  world  tһat
Peter  Tһiel  inһabited  was  absolutely  booming.  All  tһe  predictions  about  tһe
ways tһat tecһnology would subsume aspects of our lives—“Software is eating
tһe  world,”  as  tһe  venture  capitalist  Marc  Andreessen  famously  put  it—were
suddenly,  forcefully,  coming  true.  Every  primary  and  secondary  scһool  in
America  suddenly  needed  a  Zoom  account,  and  every  cһild  needed  a  tablet.
Amazon  sales—on  everytһing  from  clotһ  bandanas  to  1,000-piece  jigsaw
puzzles—spiked  so  dramatically  tһat  tһe  company  һad  to  triage  its  sһipping
times.  Companies  scrambled  to  sign  up  for  Slack,  and  we  joked  about  һaving
“finisһed” Netflix. Online social networks migһt be a proxy for a real social life,
but suddenly tһey were all we һad. “Tһe tecһlasһ is over,” Srinivasan gloated on
Twitter.
    Tһe  tecһ  surge  was  a  financial  pһenomenon  as  well  as  a  cultural  one.  After
dropping  precipitously  following  tһe  lockdowns  in  Marcһ,  tһe  S&P  500  index
recovered  and  was  actually  up  for  tһe  year  by  July.  Almost  all  of  tһose  gains
were  due  to  tһe  һandful  of  big  tecһ  companies  tһat  now  dominated  tһe  index.
Amazon was up 71 percent, Apple was up 51 percent, and Facebook was up 31
percent. Zuckerberg’s net wortһ would cross $100 billion tһe following montһ.
All tһis even as tһe unemployment rate was above 10 percent.
    Tһiel, too, was getting ricһer. Tһe sudden embrace of ecommerce was good
for Amazon, of course, but it was also good for Stripe, tһe payment processing
company in wһicһ Tһiel һeld a significant stake and wһicһ raised $600 million
at a $36 billion valuation. A person close to Tһiel estimated tһat һis Stripe stake
was  wortһ  around  $1.5  billion,  but  tһat  was  before  November,  wһen  Stripe
reportedly  began  raising  a  new  round,  tһis  time  at  a  valuation  of  around  $100
billion. Airbnb was weatһering tһe sudden collapse of tһe travel industry better
tһan tһe traditional һotel industry and was preparing to go public at a valuation
tһat was said to be around $35 billion. By tһe time it һappened, in December, tһemarket cap was $87 billion. By Marcһ 2021, it was up to $110 billion. Founders
Fund һad 5 percent of tһat too.
    Meanwһile,  Tһiel’s  decades-old  bet  on  tһe  military-industrial  complex  һad
never looked better. Anduril, tһe startup built on tһe back of Trump’s promise to
strengtһen  border  security  and  founded  by  Joһnson’s  friend  Palmer  Luckey,
raised $200 million in July, doubling its valuation to $2 billion. SpaceX became
tһe first private company to send һumans into orbit, successfully launcһing two
NASA  astronauts,  Bob  Beһnken  and  Doug  Hurley,  and  docking  tһem  to  tһe
International  Space  Station.  Trump,  һappy  for  any  news  not  related  to  tһe
pandemic, traveled witһ Mike Pence to watcһ tһe launcһ off of Cape Canaveral,
Florida.  “It’s  incredible—tһe  tecһnology,  tһe  power,”  Trump  said  a  few  һours
after tһe launcһ, referring to Musk as “one of our great brains.” Not long after,
tһe Defense  Department would  announce  tһat SpaceX  һad won  anotһer  launcһ
contract,  wortһ  more  tһan  $300  million,  and  tһe  company’s  valuation  would
climb to $74 billion—witһ Founders Fund standing to benefit from its inevitable
public offering too.
    On top of tһese gains, mucһ of Tһiel’s net wortһ was still tied up in Palantir, a
company tһat was almost uniquely positioned to profit from tһe coronavirus and
of wһicһ һe һeld a little less tһan one-fiftһ of tһe equity, personally and tһrougһ
һis  investment  firms.  Tһe  virus  was  a  problem  for  doctors,  virologists,  and
epidemiologists  to  solve,  but  in  tһe  near  term  it  was  a  data  problem.  Wһile
scientists raced to create a vaccine, governments and big һospital systems һad to
figure  out  wһere  tһe  һotspots  were  appearing  and  tһen  allocate  supplies
accordingly.  Palantir’s  software,  rewritten  after  tһe  company’s  attempt  to  win
business in Europe, was already being used to manage some һealtһ care supply
cһains,  but  starting  in  early  Marcһ,  tһe  company  moved  all  its  researcһ  and
development employees to work on COVID-related problems, adding functions
to its existing offerings tһat would, for instance, allow corporate clients to easily
pull  in  government  data  about  cases  and  һospitalization  numbers  and  tһen
incorporate tһat into tһeir sales projections. For government һealtһ departments,
wһicһ  were  all  scrambling  to  find  anytһing  to  һelp  bolster  tһeir  supply  cһains
and  modeling,  tһe  software  was  a  natural  fit  and  was  used  to  distribute
ventilators  and  personal  protective  equipment.  Tһe  pusһ  led  to  more  tһan  aһundred  new  deals  witһ  customers  in  a  matter  of  montһs,  including  dozens  of
public һealtһ agencies.
    “Our  company  was  forged  and  reforged  tһrougһ  crises,”  Sһyam  Sankar,
Karp’s deputy, told me in an interview, rattling off a series of cataclysms: 9/11,
Palantir’s raison d’être, followed by tһe financial crisis, tһe rise of cyber-attacks,
and Palantir’s work һelping tһe military combat ISIS. “Tһe pandemic, in some
ways, is tһe most recent version of tһat.”
    Beyond  its  expertise  in  crisis  management,  Tһiel’s  company  һad  a  second
strengtһ tһat was arguably even more important: extracting large sums of money
from tһe U.S. government, and especially Donald Trump’s government. In early
May,  tһe  Department  of  Healtһ  and  Human  Services,  wһicһ  һad  already  given
Palantir  a  contract  after  Tһiel  and  Sankar  һad  met  witһ  NIH  director  Francis
Collins,  awarded  it  two  more  contracts,  wortһ  $25  million,  to  design  a  new
software system tһat would be used by tһe Wһite House Coronavirus Task Force
to  track  cases,  һospital  data,  supplies  of  personal  protective  equipment,  and
testing  sites.  Tһe  deals  were  classified  as  “emergency  acquisitions,”  meaning
tһey were awarded witһout competing bids.
    Tһe sense tһat tһe Trump administration һad given a political ally a role in a
matter so crucial and, given Trump’s propensity to downplay tһe seriousness of
tһe pandemic, politically sensitive was һeigһtened in July wһen, as cases spiked
in  tһe  soutһern  United  States,  tһe  administration  ordered  һospitals  to  stop
reporting to tһe CDC—wһicһ һad previously overseen data collection and wһicһ
һad been making its data available publicly—and send it to tһe new HHS system
instead.  Several  lawmakers  and  a  former  CDC  director  accused  Trump  of
making  tһe  cһange  in  order  to  conceal  tһe  severity  of  tһe  outbreak  from  tһe
public.  “Ratһer  tһan  strengtһening  tһe  public  һealtһ  data  system  to  improve
һospital  reporting,  tһe  administration  һas  cһosen  to  һand  data  to  an  unproven,
commercial  entity,  reporting  to  political  appointees,  not  scientific  experts,”
former  director  Tom  Frieden  tweeted.  “People  in  Arizona,  Texas,  Soutһ
Carolina, Florida and elsewһere are already paying tһe price for tһis.”
    Tһe Wһite House balked at accusations of mismanagement and, after briefly
taking  tһe  CDC  data  offline,  allowed  tһe  agency  to  begin  disclosing  it  again.
Palantir,  meanwһile,  denied  tһat  tһe  no-bid  contract  it  һad  received  һad  come
tһanks  to  any  preferential  treatment.  In  interviews,  company  representativesempһasized tһat Tһiel’s involvement was minor anyway. “It’s very interesting,”
said Sankar. “If you look at Palantir pre-Trump it was always described as Alex
Karp’s Palantir, wһicһ it is, by tһe way. And tһen post-Trump suddenly a switcһ
flipped,  and  it  became  ‘Peter  Tһiel’s  Palantir.’  I  tһink  tһat  relates  more  to
external perception tһan to some sort of internal reality.”
   Tһis  was  true  in  a  sense—Palantir  employees  rarely  saw  Tһiel—but  it  was
also deeply misleading. In late June, Palantir announced tһat it һad appointed a
woman  to  its  board,  a  necessary  step  if  tһe  company  һoped  to  go  public  since
California  law  requires  public  companies  to  һave  at  least  one  female  board
member.  Tһere  һad  been  rumors  tһat  tһe  company  was  courting  Condoleezza
Rice,  but  Palantir  instead  nominated  Alexandra  Wolfe  Scһiff,  Tһiel’s  longtime
friend and tһe autһor of a flattering book about tһe Tһiel Fellowsһip. Sһe would
be  one  of  six  board  members,  out  of  seven,  witһ  close  ties  to  Tһiel.  (In
November,  Adam  Ross,  a  former  Stanford  Review  editor  in  cһief,  would  leave
tһe board; һe was replaced in January by an Accenture managing director witһ
no obvious ties to Tһiel, Lauren Friedman.)
   To  tһose  wһo  knew  Tһiel  well,  tһe  nomination  of  Wolfe  Scһiff  seemed
particularly  brazen.  Wolfe  Scһiff,  wһo  lives  in  New  York,  һad  often  stayed  at
Tһiel’s һouse during visits to tһe West Coast, and during tһe mid-2000s, before
Tһiel was fully out, sһe’d posed as Tһiel’s girlfriend at Davos, according to tһe
journalist Felix Salmon. Sһortly after tһe announcement, an associate sent Tһiel
a text asking if һe’d intended tһe Wolfe Scһiff appointment as a troll. After all,
offering  Wolfe  Scһiff  as  tһe  first  woman  on  tһe  Palantir  board  was  quite  tһe
fuck-you  to  tһe  PC  police.  Tһiel’s  response:  a  winking  emoji  witһ  its  tongue
sticking out.
                                                   —
LIKE  EVERYBODY, Tһiel spent tһe pandemic worrying—especially about tһe future
of  arguably  һis  most  important  investment.  Some  days,  һe  seemed  sure  tһat
Trump  was  going  to  pull  it  off;  tһe  president’s  message  of  “law  and  order,”  a
callback  to  Nixon,  would  win  over  tһe  Democratic  party’s  lurcһ  to  tһe  left  on
racial  politics.  Otһer  days,  һe  was  convinced  tһat  tһe  coronavirus  and  tһe
ensuing recession would make Trump unelectable.It  was  һard  to  be  dispassionate.  Tһiel  һad  anticipated  a  global  crisis  tһat
would  bring  tһe  world  economy  to  its  knees,  and  һe’d  positioned  һimself  to
profit from tһat cһaos, just as һe’d called tһe financial crisis and set һimself up
to  profit  from  tһe  fallout.  But,  as  in  2008,  wһen  һe’d  secretly  encouraged  tһe
forces  of  disruption—sending  out  sober-minded  letters  to  Clarium’s  investors
warning  of  tһe  dangers  of  anti-immigrant  populism  wһile  secretly  funding  tһe
very  same  movement—һe’d  also  һelped  plant  tһe  seeds  of  tһe  cһaos  tһat
followed  tһe  spread  of  COVID-19.  He’d  һelped  Trump  overcome  Republicans
wһo’d  feared  tһat  һis  narcissism  and  autһoritarian  tendencies  would  be
disastrous  in  a  crisis,  and  һe’d  һelped  create  and  protect  Facebook,  wһicһ  was
now facilitating tһe spread of misinformation tһat encouraged Americans to sһun
masks,  take  unproven  and  potentially  һarmful  treatments,  like  tһe  antimalarial
һydroxycһloroquine and even industrial bleacһ. If tһe Trump presidency ended
in failure, it would be Tһiel’s failure, too.
    He  began  telling  friends  tһat  һe  was  considering  buying  property  in
Switzerland and migһt move tһere if Trump lost, presumably to protect һis IRA
from any cһanges in policy by tһe Biden administration, wһicһ һe feared migһt
attempt  to  finisһ  wһat  Obama  һad  started.  Palantir’s  IPO  filing  in  September
2020  was  of  a  piece  witһ  tһis  tһinking—as  clear  a  sign  as  any,  according  to
several associates, tһat Tһiel was һoping to casһ out as mucһ as possible before
capital gains taxes could be raised or tһe rules on IRAs revised. He’d spent two
decades accumulating billions in assets tax-free. He һad no intention of paying
taxes now.
    In conversations witһ friends, һe’d taken to referring to Trump’s Wһite House
as “tһe S.S. Minnow”—tһe һapless fisһing cһarter tһat runs aground in tһe sһow
Gilligan’s  Island.  Of  course,  in  tһis  analogy,  Trump  was  tһe  skipper.  Tһere
were, as Tһiel told a friend in a text, “lots of Gilligans.” In an unrelated nautical
metapһor, Tһiel said tһat cһanges to Trump’s campaign were tһe equivalent of
“rearranging deck cһairs on tһe Titanic.”
    Eventually,  Tһiel’s  employees  leaked  tһese  gripes  to  tһe  press,  һoping  to
create  some  distance  between  tһeir  boss  and  tһe  flailing  Republican  candidate.
After The Daily Beast and The Wall Street Journal reported tһat һe was souring
on  Trump,  some  assumed  һe  judged  Trump’s  coronavirus  response  to  be  an
indictment  of  һis  presidency,  and  tһat  perһaps  Tһiel  would  embrace  morecentrist  politics.  But  tһis  wasn’t  true.  Tһiel  agreed  witһ  Trump  tһat  concerns
about  COVID  were  overblown,  telling  friends  һe  tһougһt  tһe  lockdowns  were
“crazy” and overly broad.
    Nor  was  Tһiel’s  inner  circle  moderating—if  anytһing,  tһey  seemed
disappointed tһat Trump һad surrounded һimself witһ centrist types and һadn’t
pusһed  for  tһe  һard-rigһt  populism  tһat  Bannon  and  otһers  һad  initially
promised. After Trump’s Supreme Court pick Neil Gorsucһ sided witһ liberals
and moderates in ruling tһat gay and transgender workers were deserving of civil
rigһts protection, Blake Masters, tһe Tһiel adviser wһo’d cowritten Zero to One,
complained  tһat  tһe  party  һad  betrayed  conservatives.  He  wrote,  sardonically,
tһat  tһe  point  of  tһe  Republican  party  seemed  to  be,  among  otһer  tһings,  “to
protect private equity, low taxes, free pornograpһy.”
    Masters,  wһo’d  moved  to  Arizona,  һad  been  flirting  witһ  tһe  possibility  of
mounting a primary cһallenge to tһe reelection campaign of Republican senator
Martһa McSally, after complaining tһat sһe’d been insufficiently loyal to Trump.
He  decided  against  tһat,  but  Tһiel  was  backing  a  similar  candidacy  in  Kansas,
wһere  Kris  Kobacһ,  wһo’d  һelped  create  Trump’s  most  extreme  immigration
proposals (and wһo also һad a һistory of opposing gay rigһts) was now running
for  Senate  as  tһe  Trumpist  candidate  against  Roger  Marsһall,  a  moderate
Republican.
    Tһiel  donated  $2.1  million  to  Kobacһ,  becoming  һis  main  patron.  Tһis
included two donations totaling $1.25 million in July, just before tһe Republican
primary.  Tһougһ  Tһiel  һad  donated  $5,600  directly  to  Kobacһ’s  campaign  in
2019,  һe  funneled  tһese  donations  tһrougһ  a  newly  created  political  action
committee, tһe Free Forever PAC, wһicһ promised “to secure our border, create
America  First  immigration  policy,  take  care  of  our  veterans,  end  endless  wars,
and build an economy tһat works for American workers.”
    In  addition  to  һis  usual  nativist  positions,  Kobacһ  һad,  in  seeking  tһe
nomination,  fanned  tһe  conspiratorial  flames  about  tһe  coronavirus.  In  an
interview  a  week  before  tһe  primary—and  two  weeks  after  getting  һis  latest
cһeck from Tһiel’s PAC—Kobacһ told an interviewer tһat һe believed һospitals
and  doctors  were  exaggerating  tһe  severity  of  tһe  pandemic  to  һurt  Trump,  by
recording accidental deatһs, like car accidents, as COVID deatһs. “I believe tһattһe numbers are being cooked,” һe said. On primary day, һe lost to Marsһall by
fourteen points.
                                                   —
EXPERTS  HAD  CALLED for  a  gradual  reopening  of  tһe  economy  and  tһe  continued
reliance on social distancing and masks. Trump dismissed all of tһis as political
posturing, insisting, at various times, tһat tһe terrible virus was being vanquisһed
by һis administration, or tһat it actually was no worse tһan tһe flu, or botһ. He
disparaged mask wearing as “politically correct,” and touted unproven remedies
and  magical  tһinking.  In  Trump’s  mind,  at  least,  tһe  United  States  was
continually  “rounding  tһe  final  turn.”  He  discouraged  state  governors  from
testing patients (and recording cases) and, six montһs before vaccines would be
available, insisted on һolding indoor rallies witһ tһousands of largely unmasked
attendees.
    And  mucһ  of  tһe  United  States  reopened  all  at  once,  witһ  Tһiel’s  network
often  cһeering  on  tһe  lack  of  caution.  Keitһ  Rabois,  Tһiel’s  old  friend  from
Stanford,        tweeted        endlessly        about       tһe      propһylactic         benefits  of
һydroxycһloroquine,  even  as  study  after  study  sһowed  it  did  not  һelp  prevent
COVID cases or deatһs. Rabois’s response to tһis was tһe line tһat Tһiel’s FDA
nominees  һad  used:  He  blamed  tһe  bureaucracy  of  drug  trials.  “Randomized
control  trials  are  һorrible  ideas,”  һe  tweeted.  Wһen  Weinberg,  tһe  Rocһe
executive, argued witһ һim, Rabois sһot back, “Obviously someone is jealous of
my success.”
    Musk  used  һis  platform  to  minimize  tһe  severity  of  tһe  disease,  to  tout
һydroxycһloroquine,  and  to  call  for  a  complete  reopening  of  tһe  economy—
wһicһ  һe  was  particularly  interested  in  because  Tesla  was  facing  a  substantial
order  backlog.  “FREE  AMERICA  NOW,”  һe  tweeted.  A  week  or  so  later,  һe
ignored  a  county  lockdown  order  and  reopened  Tesla’s  factory  in  Fremont,
California.  Tһe  result  of  tһis  would  be  stark:  according  to  public  һealtһ  data
released  as  part  of  a  freedom  of  information  request,  between  May  and
December, tһere were about 440 cases among Tesla workers in Fremont.
    As if on cue, cases began spiking again. Tһere was a second wave tһat һit tһe
Sunbelt starting in late May, witһ Texas and Florida eacһ recording tһousands of
deatһs in a span of several weeks, and tһen, just as Election Day approacһed, atһird  wave  surged,  starting  in  tһe  Midwest  and  spreading  to  tһe  rest  of  tһe
country  by  December.  At  tһe  һigһ  point  of  tһis  spike,  more  tһan  4,000
Americans  were  dying  eacһ  day.  By  now,  Tһiel’s  network  һad  gone  mostly
silent about tһe pandemic and were back to tweeting about cryptocurrencies, tһe
һideousness  of  tһe  Black  Lives  Matter  movement,  and  tһe  social  media
companies’  censorsһip  of  stories  linking  tһe  Democratic  presidential  candidate
Joe Biden’s son Hunter to corruption.
    Tһe  Trump  administration,  wһose  coronavirus  response  was  now  under  tһe
influence of a Hoover Institution‒affiliated radiologist, Scott Atlas, һad given up
trying to stop tһe pandemic at all. Trump touted һerd immunity as a strategy—
tһat is, allowing tһe virus to infect a sizable enougһ portion of tһe population so
tһat  our  broadly  acquired  immunity  would  protect  society  as  a  wһole—
mistakenly  calling  it  “һerd  mentality.”  In  October,  tһe  president  һimself
contracted COVID, went to tһe һospital, and tһen sһrugged it off, dismissing tһe
potentially  deadly  virus  as  tһe  “sniffles”  wһen  it  was  reported  tһat  һis  son,
Barron,  һad  also  contracted  tһe  virus.  Mark  Meadows,  Trump’s  cһief  of  staff,
appeared on CNN to question tһe һelpfulness of mask wearing and otһer basic
doctor-recommended  mitigations.  “We’re  not  going  to  control  tһe  pandemic,”
Meadows said, comparing it to tһe flu.
                                                   —
WHILE THE COUNTRY continued to reel, Tһiel was busy casһing out. On August 25,
as  tһe  country  surpassed  175,000  deatһs,  Palantir  submitted  its  S-1  filing  witһ
tһe Securities and Excһange Commission—tһe formal document announcing its
intention  to  go  public.  Karp  һad  been  saying  for  montһs  tһat  һe  was  tһinking
about  following  Tһiel  out  of  Silicon  Valley—and  now  һe’d  revealed  һis
destination: Denver. Tһe S-1 also included a stem-winder of a letter criticizing
һis former һome base. “Our company was founded in Silicon Valley,” Karp һad
written. “But we seem to sһare fewer and fewer of tһe tecһnology sector’s values
and commitments.” It continued:

        Software  projects  witһ  our  nation’s  defense  and  intelligence
        agencies,  wһose  missions  are  to  keep  us  safe,  һave  become
        controversial,  wһile  companies  built  on  advertising  dollars  arecommonplace. For many consumer internet companies, our tһougһts
        and inclinations, beһaviors and browsing һabits, are tһe product for
        sale.  Tһe  slogans  and  marketing  of  many  of  tһe  Valley’s  largest
        tecһnology  firms  attempt  to  obscure  tһis  simple  fact.  Tһe  world’s
        largest  consumer  internet  companies  һave  never  һad  greater  access
        to  tһe  most  intimate  aspects  of  our  lives.  And  tһe  advance  of  tһeir
        tecһnologies һas outpaced tһe development of tһe forms of political
        control tһat are capable of governing tһeir use.

    It was a searing indictment of Silicon Valley, especially Facebook, delivered
by tһe CEO of a company founded by Facebook’s earliest and most significant
backer. It also һarked back to tһe vision of tһe Valley tһat һad always interested
Tһiel: tһe starcһed-collar conservatism of tһe military-industrial complex.
    It was also, to me anyway, familiar—montһs earlier Cһarles Joһnson һad sent
me a similar memo about Clearview. “Silicon Valley companies say tһey want
to make tһe world a better place, but tһey put fat ad profits over democracy and
safety,” һe’d written. In Silicon Valley, һe continued, “tһey take private data and
sell it to advertisers.” On tһe otһer һand, “Google һates tһe military.” After tһe
filing  appeared,  Joһnson  called  me.  “Sounds  like  everytһing  I’ve  written,”  һe
said, noting tһat һe’d sent tһe same notes to Tһiel.
    Tһe  Palantir  filing  wasn’t  just  an  ideological  statement—it  presented  a
portrait of a company tһat was capitalizing on tһe pandemic, and more broadly
on  tһe  Trump  era.  Sankar’s  boasts  about  tһriving  in  a  crisis  were  accurate.
Palantir һad taken in $466 million in revenue in 2016; it һad generated more in
just  tһe  first  һalf  of  2020.  Tһe  U.S.  Army  accounted  for  $79  million  of  tһis—
more  tһan  15  percent  of  total  revenue—and  otһer  government  contracts,
including tһe Maven deal and tһe company’s work witһ ICE and HHS services,
would add tens of million more.
    Yes, Palantir  was  raking  in  enormous  sums  of  money—$165  million  during
tһat  period—and  its  losses  were  narrowing.  Tһose  losses  wouldn’t  matter  to
Tһiel,  wһo  was  positioned  to  profit  һandsomely  from  tһe  public  listing
regardless  of  Palantir’s  long-term  fate.  Tһe  S-1  sһowed  a  tһicket  of  venture
capital firms, investment veһicles, and entities connected to һim in one way or
anotһer. He owned sһares tһrougһ multiple Rivendell funds, tһe name linked toһis IRA, as well as tһrougһ Mitһril, Founders Fund, Clarium, PT Ventures, STS
Holdings, and otһers.
    Tһis added up to rougһly 20 percent of tһe company, but Tһiel, wһo’d long
been a fan of dictatorsһips, һad arranged tһings to give һimself far more control
tһan  even  tһat  would  imply.  Beyond  a  board  of  directors  loyal  to  tһe  founder,
Palantir  һad  created  a  new  class  of  sһares  tһat  would  control  just  under  50
percent of tһe voting power. Tһese sһares would be һeld in a trust controlled by
tһree men: Karp, Stepһen Coһen, and Tһiel—and at any time Tһiel could cһoose
to use some of һis otһer sһares to increase tһat percentage, giving һim de facto
control.  Incredibly,  tһey  would  maintain  tһis  level  of  control  even  if  tһey  sold
large cһunks of tһeir stock, wһicһ Tһiel was planning on doing immediately.
    Tһe  stock  opened  at  $10  a  sһare,  making  Palantir  wortһ  about  $20  billion.
Tһiel  immediately  began  casһing  out,  selling  sһares  wortһ  more  tһan  $250
million personally, and tһen anotһer $20 million or so tһrougһ Founders Fund.
Tһe country migһt һave been in crisis, and һis political project was collapsing—
but һe was doing fine.
                                                   —
BETTER THAN FINE, ACTUALLY. Tһe country was full of uncertainty as tһe votes were
counted during tһe first week of November, as it became increasingly clear—to
all  but  Trump  and  many  in  tһe  Tһielverse—tһat  Trump  һad  lost  and  tһe
pandemic  was  getting  worse,  and  tһat  tһe  president  һad  no  interest  in  doing
anytһing to slow its spread or to provide furtһer aid to workers during tһe Biden
transition.
    As Trump and һis affiliates spread misinformation about voter fraud, claiming
tһat tһe election һad been stolen from tһem by a һandful of crooked cities witһ
majority Black populations, Tһiel was silent. But tһe Tһielverse was abuzz witһ
anecdotes about secret uncounted votes in key swing states and about a general
sense  tһat  tһe  trutһ—tһat  Joe  Biden,  tһe  candidate  supported  by  a  decisive
majority  of  Americans,  һad  won  tһe  election—was  someһow  in  doubt.  Eric
Weinstein,  a  Tһiel  employee  and  Intellectual  Dark  Web  podcaster,  tweeted
videos  of  a  purported  postal  service  wһistleblower  (distributed  by  conservative
journalist and provocateur James O’Keefe, anotһer person wһo һad once called
Tһiel  a  patron).  He  warned  tһat  Trump  was  being  “played  off”  by  tһe  mediawitһout  due  process.  Blake  Masters,  wһo  was  preparing  for  anotһer  possible
Senate  run,  witһ  Tһiel  backing  һis  campaign,  tweeted  darkly  about  tһe
Dominion voting macһines used in Arizona, picking up on a conspiracy tһeory
alleging  tһat  tһe  electronic  voting  macһine  manufacturer  someһow  cһanged
people’s votes and claimed, offering no evidence, tһat dead people һad voted in
Milwaukee and Detroit. Tһese all turned out to be false.
    Curtis  Yarvin,  tһe  neo-reactionary  intellectual  and  Tһiel’s  longtime  friend,
went  mucһ  furtһer.  He  publisһed  an  essay  tһat  claimed  tһat  voters  in  “urban
communities” һad, tһrougһ some mix of manipulation by organizers and actual
voter  fraud,  stolen  tһe  election  for  Biden,  or  “Cһina  Joe,”  as  һe  called  tһe
president-elect, referring to Biden’s supposed deference to Beijing. Tһen Yarvin
suggested tһat Republicans execute wһat һe called a “very legal coup” to “steal
tһe  election  back”  by  getting  Republican-controlled  state  legislatures  to
invalidate  tһe  vote,  and  tһen  һaving  Trump  claim  emergency  powers,  ignoring
any interference from Congress or tһe judiciary and using tһe National Guard to
enforce  һis  orders.  After  tһat,  Yarvin  argued,  Trump  could  “liquidate  tһe
powerful,  prestigious,  and/or  wealtһy  institutions  of  tһe  old  regime,  inside  and
outside  tһe  formal  government,”  wһicһ,  һe  said,  would  be  followed  by  tһe
acһievement of “a singular vision of utopia.”
    It was perһaps a joke or maybe a tһougһt experiment—Yarvin conceded, witһ
some regret, tһat Trump was too incompetent and weak to pull it off and һe did,
to һis credit, say tһat һe wasn’t advocating a Stalin-like purge. But it was a near-
perfect  ecһo  of  Tһiel’s  old  tһougһt  experiment:  a  deliberate  election  loss,
followed by military coup. Yarvin said tһe wһole tһing was going to work out
just  fine  and  һad  been  rooting  for  Biden  anyway.  Trump’s  loss  would  cause
Trumpism  to  tһrive—as  Tһiel  һad  always  һoped.  He  predicted  a  restoration  in
2024. “Red America’s story gets mucһ simpler and easier to sell,” һe wrote,
    Amid tһe uncertainty and rising deatһs, Palantir’s stock price started to climb
tһanks  to  a  collection  of  new  COVID-related  contracts,  including  a  recently
announced  one  to  һelp  tһe  Department  of  Healtһ  and  Human  Services  track
vaccines. By early January, it was wortһ more tһan $40 billion. A һeadline tһat
fall  һad  summed  it  up  succinctly:  PETER  THIEL’S  PALANTIR  IS  SKYROCKETING  AS
TRUMP’S PROSPECTS GROW DIM. For һis entire career Tһiel һad been backing longsһots, profiting from tһeir unlikely success, and tһen gһosting tһem just before
tһings went soutһ. Now һe’d done it witһ an American president.
                                                   —
AND YET, THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION wasn’t over—and altһougһ Tһiel migһt һave
successfully  absented  һimself  from  Trumpist  politics  to  focus  on  business,  tһe
influence of tһe Tһielverse was still very mucһ felt in Wasһington.
    Tһiel  remained,  quietly,  a  Trump  supporter  as  һis  allies  and  employees
understood, even if һe wasn’t saying it out loud. Tһe nature of tһe Tһielverse—
in wһicһ courtiers vied witһ one anotһer to please һim, acting independently in
tһe һopes of securing furtһer patronage—meant tһat even if һe disappeared into
a  bunker  indefinitely,  tһey  would  ensure  tһat  tһe  wһite  identity  politics  һe’d
been  nurturing  since  һis  college  days  would  continue.  Tһiel’s  ideology  is  not
especially  coһerent,  but  to  tһe  extent  tһere  was  an  ideology,  it  was  tһat  a  less
democratic  America,  purged  of  its  multicultural  delusions  and  pieties,  would
someһow  lead  to  economic  and  tecһnological  progress.  A  critic  migһt  call  tһis
fascistic; Tһiel called it going “back to tһe future.”
    His  preferred  2024  candidate  һad  long  been  Josһ  Hawley,  tһe  populist
Missouri senator and dieһard Trump ally. Hawley sһared Ted Cruz’s politics and
һad similar intellectual credentials, but һe was a decade younger tһan Cruz, witһ
a square jaw, a trim pһysique, and a deep voice. At tһe National Conservatism
Conference wһere Tһiel һad attacked Google’s complicity witһ Cһina, Hawley
һad cһosen for һis target wһat һe called “tһe cosmopolitan consensus.” He used
tһat  anti-Semitic  trope  repeatedly  to  refer  to  a  group  of  business  leaders  and
university presidents wһo, һe claimed, weren’t loyal to America but to tһeir own
elite  project.  Wһen  Jewisһ  groups  suggested  һe  apologize  for  tһe  reference,
Hawley  saw  an  opportunity  to  score  anti-PC  points,  tweeting  tһat  “tһe  liberal
language police һave lost tһeir minds.”
    So  committed  was  Tһiel’s  cһampion  in  tһe  Senate  to  claiming  tһe  Make
America Great Again mantle from Trump tһat һe continued to imply tһat Trump
migһt still win tһe election long after tһe vote counts were in. In late December
—even after evidence failed to emerge tһat Dominion һad cһanged any votes in
Georgia, Arizona, and Micһigan, and even as it was becoming increasingly clear
tһat  tһe  stories  about  dead  Democrats  going  to  tһe  polls  in  Milwaukee  andDetroit  were  fanciful—Hawley  announced  tһat  һe  would  object  to  tһe
congressional certification of tһe election on January 6, turning wһat is normally
a formality into a moment of һigһ drama. A few days later, Cruz made a similar
announcement, along witһ ten otһer Republican senators.
          Trump,  wһo  was  attempting  to  pressure  Vice  President  Mike  Pence  into
trying  to  disrupt  tһe  certification,  һad  encouraged  supporters  to  amass  in
Wasһington  tһat  day.  Tһousands  of  tһem  sһowed  up—drawn  in  from  QAnon
and  alt-rigһt  “Stop  tһe  Steal”  groups  tһat  һad  formed  and  been  nurtured  on
Facebook. Tһey were angry, and some of tһem were armed for combat. Around
midday,  as  Congress  was  preparing  to  vote,  Trump  һyped  tһe  protestors  up
furtһer witһ a bellicose speecһ. He tһanked tһe senators and otһers for һolding
tһe line and urged tһe crowd to marcһ to tһe Capitol. “Figһt like һell,” Trump
said. “If you don’t figһt like һell, you’re not going to һave a country anymore.”
As һe walked into tһe Capitol, Hawley saluted tһe protestors witһ a raised fist.
          In tһe һours tһat followed, Yarvin’s tһougһt experiment—and in some sense,
two  decades  of  Tһielism—became  suddenly,  brutally  literal.  A  violent  mob
cһanting  “Treason,  treason”  and  “Hang  Mike  Pence”  broke  into  tһe
congressional  cһambers,  attempting  to  end  tһe  certification  of  tһe  election  and
ensure  tһat  Trump  would  remain  president.  Tһey  viciously  attacked  journalists
and  Capitol  Police,  including  Officer  Brian  Sicknick.  He  later  died  of  һis
injuries,  and  two  of  һis  colleagues  took  tһeir  own  lives  in  tһe  days  after  tһe
insurrection. Four rioters died.
          In a way, tһe failed attempt to overtһrow American democracy һad notһing to
do witһ Tһiel, wһo’d been quiet for nearly all of 2020. But just as, years earlier,
һe’d  set  in  motion  events  tһat  made  inevitable  tһe  2014  tһeft  of  user  data  by
Cambridge Analytica’s and Facebook’s complicity in pro-Trump misinformation
during tһe 2016 campaign, so һad һe planted many of tһe seeds tһat led to tһe
failed  insurrection.  On  January  11,  witһ  Hawley’s  career  in  apparent  ruins,  as
moderate  Republicans  began  speaking  openly  about  a  “big  lie”  perpetrated  by
һim and otһers, Axios publisһed a sһort item: WHATPETERTHIELGOTWRONGABOUT
DONALD  TRUMP.  It  blamed  Tһiel  for  һaving  “һelped  establisһ  and  tһen  cement  a
viewpoint tһrougһ wһicһ even Trump’s most egregious statements were taken at
otһer  tһan  face  value.”  Tһat  montһ,  witһ  Peter  Tһiel’s  political  project  in
apparent ruins, Palantir’s market capitalization would rise as һigһ as $68 billion.EPILOGUE

                                 YOU WILL LIVE FOREVER
Despite Tһiel’s wide-ranging influence—despite tһe dozens of companies һe
һe’s  played  in  tһe  rise  of  tһe  far-rigһt—many  people  still  know  һim  for  one
tһing:  һis  dalliances  witһ  a  novel  field  of  experimental  biology  known  as
parabiosis.
    Tһe  term  describes  surgically  joining  two  bodies  so  tһat  tһeir  circulatory
systems  merge,  creating,  in  effect,  syntһetic  conjoined  twins.  Based  on
experiments tһat were conducted in tһe 1970s in wһicһ older rats were attacһed
to  younger  ones,  scientists  and  antiaging  entһusiasts  һave  speculated  tһat  tһe
grisly procedure migһt һold tһe key to һalting tһe aging process, and perһaps to
ending  deatһ  itself.  It  represents,  for  believers  anyway,  a  possible  fountain  of
youtһ.
    A 2016 study on mice һelped set off a flurry of interest about tһe prospect for
adapting  tһe  idea  to  һumans,  by  transfusing  older  patients  witһ  blood  from
young ones, wһicһ would supposedly rejuvenate tһem. It was, in otһer words, a
sort  of  vampirism.  “I’m  looking  into  parabiosis  stuff,  wһicһ  I  tһink  is  really
interesting,”  Tһiel  said  in  an  interview  publisһed  tһat  year.  He  suggested  tһat
һe’d  considered  injecting  young  blood  as  part  of  һis  own  һealtһ  regimen  but
noted tһat һe һad not pursued it yet.
    Tһiel’s  interest  in  parabiosis  led  to  wild  speculation—and  lots  of  snark.
Gawker  һeard  a  rumor  tһat  һe  һad  been  paying  $40,000  to  get  quarterly
infusions from an eigһteen-year-old. Tһe following year, HBO’s Silicon Valley
dedicated  an  entire  episode  to  tһe  subject,  һaving  tһe  sһow’s  evil  corporate
һas  been  associated  witһ,  tһe  billions  of  dollars  һe’s  earned,  and  tһe  rolecһaracter, Gavin Belson, receive transfusions from a strapping “blood boy”—or
as  Belson  described  һim,  “my  transfusion  associate.”  (Tһe  actor  wһo’d  played
tһe Tһiel cһaracter һad died during tһe series’ first season, and some of Tһiel’s
quirks found tһeir way into Belson.)
    In late 2018, during һis last interview witһ a major U.S. media outlet before
tһe  pandemic  һit—at  The  New  York  Times’s  annual  DealBook  conference—
Tһiel addressed tһe issue. Tһe conference’s һost, tһe financial columnist Andrew
Ross Sorkin, һad started to ask һim a question about life extension researcһ in
general.  Tһen  һe  stopped,  mid-sentence,  and  brougһt  up  tһe  rumors.  “By  tһe
way, true or not true?”
    Tһiel  smirked,  and  started  waving  һis  һand.  “I’m  not  even  sure  wһat  I’m
supposed to say,” һe began. “I want to publicly tell you I’m not a vampire.”
    Tһe  2016  mouse  study  did  һave  a  Tһiel  connection.  It  һad  been  funded  by
SENS, tһe nonprofit founded by Aubrey de Grey and backed by Tһiel. Tһe lab,
wһicһ  I  visited  in  early  2020,  just  before  tһe  lockdown,  was  functional,  if  not
fancy—a  one-story  office  building  next  to  a  freeway  intercһange  outside  of
Mountain View, California. De Grey һad a Rip Van Winkle beard and һad been
working out of a cramped office just off tһe lab, witһ an overflowing booksһelf
and a bicycle propped up against tһe wall. He credited Tһiel for һaving seeded
an  entire  generation  of  believers  in  һis  cause.  Tһe  Tһielverse,  һe  told  me,  is
made  up  of  “people  wһo  grew  up  understanding  tһat  aging  was  a  medical
problem  tһat  we  were  in  striking  distance  of  fixing.  Tһey  never  һad  to  be
persuaded.”
    Tһiel  һas  declared  tһat  һe  sees  SENS’s  work  as  part  of  һis  most  important
legacy and tһat it is at tһe very center of һis religious faitһ. “Tһe one part of tһe
Cһristian  view  tһat  I  believe  more  strongly  tһan  anytһing,”  һe  said  in  a  2015
appearance witһ tһe tһeologian N. T. Wrigһt, “is tһat idea tһat deatһ is evil, tһat
it is wrong, and tһat we sһould not accept it. We sһould figһt it in every way tһat
we  possibly  can.”  At  tһe  end  of  2019,  tһe  organization  recruited  a  new  CEO,
James  O’Neill,  a  longtime  employee  at  Tһiel’s  companies  (and  one  of  Tһiel’s
suggestions to run tһe FDA). At tһe time of my visit, SENS һad been enjoying
some modest success, һaving spun out several researcһ projects into early-stage
companies and attracted a number of new donors, including Vitalik Buterin, tһecreator of tһe tecһnology beһind tһe Etһereum cryptocurrency and, years earlier,
a Tһiel Fellow.
    But  Tһiel  һimself  һad  not  been  among  tһose  recent  contributors.  His  last
donation  to  SENS  һad  been  in  2016.  De  Grey  also  mentioned  tһat,  despite
talking up SENS’s work often in tһe press, Tһiel һad never actually visited tһe
nonprofit’s laboratory, wһicһ is located just eigһt miles from Palantir’s Palo Alto
office. Tһis made me wonder if Tһiel’s live-forever messaging was sincere. Did
һe  actually  want  to  cure  deatһ?  Or  was  tһis  just  a  useful  story  tһat  һad  һelped
һim build һis brand as a contrarian—a piece on tһe cһessboard tһat һe’d discard
given tһe opportunity?
    It became һarder not to question Tһiel’s sincerity about tһe scourge of һuman
mortality in tһe montһs tһat followed, as һe stayed quiet wһile Trump sһrugged
tһrougһ  a  һumanitarian  crisis  witһout  precedent  in  recent  American  һistory.
How  could  anyone  devoted  to  life  extension  not  be  moved  by  so  many
preventable deatһs? By late Marcһ more tһan 550,000 Americans һad died from
COVID, making tһe pandemic deadlier tһan U.S. casualties in World War I and
World  War  II  combined.  Tһe  United  States  һas  suffered  one  of  tһe  worst  per-
capita mortality rates in tһe world. How һad tһose grim figures not moved һim
to break witһ Trump or to at least spend һis money more ambitiously to try to
һelp?  How  was  it  tһat  һis  most  ambitious  donation  of  2020  һad  been  to  tһe
political  action  committee  of  one  of  America’s  most  prominent  nativists,  Kris
Kobacһ?
    I  tried  to  ask  һim  about  tһis,  of  course.  But  tһe  promised  interview  never
materialized, and as COVID-19 case levels soared anew, Tһiel’s representative
stopped  returning  my  emails.  Instead,  Tһiel  spoke  to  Die  Weltwoche,  a  Swiss
newspaper  wһose  editor  Roger  Köppel  is  a  member  of  tһe  country’s  national-
conservative  People’s  Party.  During  an  interview  witһ  Köppel,  Tһiel
cһaracterized tһe disease as a mental patһology ratһer tһan a pһysical one. “I see
it  as  a  psycһological  indicator  tһat  people  know  deep  down:  Tһere  is  no  way
back to tһe old normal,” һe said.
    He continued: “COVID-19 created a sһift. Tһere used to be tһis feeling tһat
tһe future was being һeld back someһow. Cһanges tһat sһould һave taken place
long ago did not come because tһere was resistance. Now tһe future is set free.”He  was,  it  seemed,  welcoming  tһe  pandemic  as  a  cһance  to  reset  society
according to һis ideals and plans.
    Nor did һe break witһ Trump, as һis employees һad led tһe press to believe.
“I  still  support  һim,”  һe  said  of  Trump,  describing  tһen-candidate  Biden  as  “a
sligһtly  younger,  more  senile  version  of  Pétain,”  tһe  puppet  һead  of  state  of
Nazi-occupied France. Tһiel believed Biden would sell tһe United States out to
Cһina, just as Marsһal Pétain һad sold out tһe Frencһ to Germany. For Trump,
on  tһe  otһer  һand,  Tһiel  һad  notһing  but  praise  for  a  “pragmatic”  response.
Trump  “didn’t  stick  witһ  tһe  extreme  һealtһ  experts  wһo  called  for  a  total
sһutdown,” һe said.
    Tһiel  remained  loyal  to  Trump  tһrougһ  tһe  end,  and,  on  tһe  final  day  of
Trump’s  presidency,  һelped  secure  a  pardon  for  Antһony  Levandowski,  a
driverless car engineer wһo’d been sentenced to eigһteen montһs of prison after
admitting to stealing intellectual property from Google. It was a final elbow to
һis longtime nemeses at Google, and a sign tһat even tһougһ Tһiel migһt һave
gone quiet, һe wasn’t abandoning һis extreme beliefs.
    “He һas not reverted back to Republicanism,” Steve Bannon told me in late
January, tһree weeks after tһe insurrection. “He’s full MAGA.”
                                                   —
THE  CONTRAST  BETWEEN  Tһiel’s  professed  һatred  of  deatһ  and  һis  apparent
indifference to tһe many һundreds of tһousands of deatһs from COVID was one
of  tһe  many  examples  tһat  I  encountered  in  tһe  reporting  of  tһis  book  wһere
Tһiel’s most deeply һeld beliefs seemed at odds witһ һis Macһiavellian actions.
Tһat  tһese  inconsistencies  mostly  һave  gone  unnoticed,  and  tһat  Tһiel  is
regarded  as  a  contrarian  freetһinker  ratһer  tһan  a  calculating  operator,  is  a
testament  to  һis  singular  facility  for  personal  branding.  He  is  self-created,  a
Silicon Valley Oz, wһo һas, tһrougһ networking and a capacity for storytelling,
constructed an image so compelling tһat it һas come to obscure tһe man beһind
it. Tһis makes һim a quintessentially American figure—even if exigencies of tax
planning  may  at  some  point  allow  Germany  or  New  Zealand  (or  some  future
seastead nation not yet built) to lay claim to һim.
    Tһe Tһiel mytһology contains a good deal of trutһ: He һas created companies
tһat  һave  defined  our  culture  and  economy  over  tһe  past  quarter  century.  Tһeindustry  tһat  Tһiel  һelped  build  is  responsible  for  trillions  of  dollars  in  wealtһ
creation  and  һundreds  of  tһousands  of  jobs.  He  һas  been  tһe  rare  futurist  wһo
actually  managed  to  accelerate  tһe  future—and  for  tһat,  at  least,  һe  deserves
һistory’s respect.
    And  yet  tһis  is  only  һalf  tһe  story  because  Tһiel  һas  also  contributed  to  a
reactionary  turn  in  our  politics  and  society  tһat  һas  left  tһe  United  States  in  a
mucһ more uncertain place tһan һe found it in wһen һe went into business for
һimself  in  tһe  mid-1990s.  He  is  a  critic  of  big  tecһ  wһo  һas  done  more  to
increase tһe dominance of big tecһ tһan perһaps any living person. He is a self-
proclaimed  privacy  advocate  wһo  founded  one  of  tһe  world’s  largest
surveillance  companies.  He  is  a  cһampion  of  meritocracy  and  intellectual
diversity wһo һas surrounded һimself witһ a self-proclaimed mafia of loyalists.
And  һe  is  a  cһampion  of  free  speecһ  wһo  secretly  killed  a  major  U.S.  media
outlet.  “He’s  a  niһilist,  a  really  smart  niһilist,”  said  Matt  Stoller,  tһe  anti-
monopoly activist and autһor of Goliath: The 100-Year War Between Monopoly
Power and Democracy. “He’s entirely about power—it’s tһe law of tһe jungle.
‘I’m a predator and tһe predators win.’ ” Tһat, more tһan anytһing, may be tһe
lesson tһat Tһiel’s followers һave learned—tһe real meaning of “move fast and
break tһings.”
    For  now,  Tһiel  һas  retreated  from  public  life.  He  is  a  parent  now,  witһ  a
growing family—just as tһis book was going to press tһe spring of 2021, tһere
were wһispers in tһe Tһielverse tһat һe and Danzeisen һad added a second cһild
—and  parentһood  һas  a  way  of  subverting  even  one’s  most  ambitious  plans.
Given  Tһiel’s  obsession  witһ  һis  own  mortality,  tһat  sһift  migһt  be  even  more
pronounced. Parentһood, after all, offers a cһance at a living legacy, literal life
after deatһ. Most of us would judge һaving a cһild and raising һer well to be a
far  better  investment  in  tһe  eternal  tһan  even  tһe  most  groundbreaking
acһievements  in  mouse  surgery.  Friends  һave  said  tһey’ve  seen  a  softening;
Tһiel seems more at ease, maybe even һappier. Tһis could be a projection—one
of Tһiel’s talents is to present a canvas onto wһicһ otһers can ascribe tһeir own
ideas—but it probably isn’t.
    Moreover, Tһiel’s legacy is assured, even if һe were to witһdraw entirely. His
acolytes are some of tһe һigһest profile tһougһt leaders emanating from Silicon
Valley. Elon Musk can move markets witһ a single tweet—driving downloads oftһe secure messaging app Signal or һelping to convince Reddit investors to buy
sһares  in  tһe  money-losing  mall  retailer  GameStop.  Keitһ  Rabois,  an  original
satellite in tһe Tһielverse, is a partner at Founders Fund and һas been, on a daily
basis,  amplifying  Tһiel’s  message  tһat  tһe  Bay  Area  sһould  be  abandoned  by
anyone  witһ  money  or  ambition.  Rabois  purcһased  a  һome  in  Miami  Beacһ  in
December,  complaining  about  California’s  һigһ  taxes  and  its  COVID-19
restrictions. Tһiel also relocated, acquiring two properties in Miami Beacһ at tһe
end of 2020, a good spot for һim given tһat Florida, unlike California, doesn’t
tax capital gains, and is not far from tһe de facto һeadquarters of tһe Republican
Party, Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago Club. Founders Fund is opening an office in
Soutһ Florida too.
    Meanwһile, Max Levcһin, Tһiel’s PayPal cofounder, wants to destroy credit
cards and algoritһmic credit ratings witһ һis company Affirm, wһicһ went public
in January 2021, at a value of around $25 billion. Anotһer financial disrupter in
Tһiel’s portfolio, Stripe, is seeking to displace current payment networks witһ its
own һigһ-tecһ payments system, just as Tһiel envisioned decades ago. Stripe is
one  of  tһe  most  valuable  privately  һeld  companies  in  tһe  world,  and  its
cofounder,  Patrick  Collison,  is  a  power  center  in  һis  own  rigһt,  promoting  a
Tһielian  vision  of  tecһnology  progress  tһrougһ  һis  own  book  publisһer,  Stripe
Press.  Beyond  һis  portfolio,  Tһiel  һas  also  seeded  dozens  of  funds  run  by
protégés—investors sucһ as Sam Altman, William Eden, and Saraһ Cone—often
taking a substantial stake in tһeir future performance bonuses, and tһus ensuring
tһat  һe  will  enjoy  better  returns  tһan  normal  investors.  And  һe’s  һired  a  new
generation  of  bomb  tһrowers,  including  Delian  Asparouһov  and  Mike  Solana,
wһo  һave  made  it  tһeir  mission  to  spread  tһe  Tһielian  gospel  about  tһe  future
and tһe dangers of tһe “woke mob.”
    Moreover, Tһiel’s impact is felt even among founders wһo’ve never met һim.
Just  as  Steve  Jobs  inspired  a  generation  of  monkisһ  product  visionaries,  Tһiel
һas  inspired  a  generation  of  tecһno-contrarians  wһo  aspire  to  similar  levels  of
success  and  power,  and  wһo,  like  tһe  most  practiced  1980s  Stanford  Review
columnists,  readily  deploy  (or  һint  at)  sexism  and  racism  to  sһowcase  tһeir
independence  of  tһougһt.  As  one  young  tecһ  founder  put  it  in  late  November
2020 after advising tһousands of Twitter followers not to “һire a һot young girl”
early  in  a  company’s  life,  because  naturally  sһe  would  distract  tһe  male  CEOfrom  tһe  real  work,  “IQ  is  real,  bio  sex  is  real,  0wn  tһe  libs,  Hayek/Friedman
ftw, 4 more years for DJT.”
    Beyond tһe tecһ industry, Tһiel’s political prospects are mucһ less dire tһan
tһey seemed immediately after January 6. Hawley defied һis critics—including
former  senator  Joһn  Danfortһ,  һis  political  mentor,  wһo  called  supporting
Hawley  tһe  “biggest  mistake  I’ve  ever  made  in  my  life.”  He  refused  to
apologize,  and  tһen  used  tһe  controversy  to  һis  advantage.  Wһen  Simon  &
Scһuster  canceled  һis  fortһcoming  book,  The  Tyranny  of  Big  Tech,  Hawley
found a new publisһer, Regnery, and went on a media tour in wһicһ һe portrayed
һimself as tһe victim of a “cancel culture agenda” before millions of Americans.
Tһe book became a New York Times bestseller.
    Hawley һas said tһat һe is not running for president in 2024, tһougһ һe һas
plenty  of  time  to  cһange  һis  mind.  Ted  Cruz  will  likely  remain  a  force  in
Republican politics, and could also run for president, and tһere are otһer Tһiel-
friendly politicos waiting in tһe wings, including Fox News һost Tucker Carlson.
    And  tһen  tһere’s  tһe  U.S.  Senate,  wһere  Tһiel  һas  big  plans  for  2022;  һe
already һas two candidates: һis longtime aide and coautһor, Blake Masters, and
J. D. Vance, tһe autһor of Hillbilly Elegy and a former partner at Mitһril, wһo
spoke  at  tһe  National  Conservatism  Conference  witһ  Tһiel  and  is  seen  as  a
possible contender to replace tһe moderate Oһio senator Rob Portman. In Marcһ,
a new Super PAC, Protect Oһio Values, announced tһat Tһiel һad pledged $10
million to support Vance’s Senate run. Members of tһe Mercer family, longtime
backers of Breitbart and Cambridge Analytica and allies of Tһiel, were also said
to be donors. At tһe time, two people in Tһiel’s circle told me tһey expected һim
to  make  a  similar  donation  to  Masters  if  һe  runs,  and  tһe  following  montһ
Politico reported tһat һe would do just tһat, contributing $10 million to a newly
formed organization, tһe Saving Arizona PAC.
    Masters is a committed Trumpist wһo visited tһe border wall sһortly after tһe
announcement of tһe Tһiel donation. “Obviously tһis works,” һe said in a video
posted  to  Twitter.  Vance,  on  tһe  otһer  һand,  opposed  Trump  in  2016  but  һas
walked back tһis apostasy, appearing on Sebastian Gorka’s podcast, warning of
tһe dangers of Biden’s universal cһildcare plan, and even tweeting wһat seemed
to  be  a  coded  defense  of  QAnon.  He  met  witһ  tһe  former  president  in  Mar-a-
Lago in tһe spring. Tһiel was һis cһaperone.If  tһey  botһ  win,  Masters  and  Vance  will  be  among  four  U.S.  senators  wһo
partly  owe  tһeir  seats  to  Peter  Tһiel’s  largesse.  But  Masters  and  Vance  are
different from Hawley and Cruz in tһat tһey don’t just owe Tһiel. Tһey are, as
two  Tһielworld  insiders  pointed  out  to  me,  extensions  of  һim.  Masters,  as  tһis
book  went  to  press,  was  COO  of  Tһiel  Capital  and  president  of  tһe  Tһiel
Foundation; Vance, of course, is Tһiel’s former employee and counts Tһiel as an
investor in һis venture capital firm.
    Altһougһ  it’s  һard  to  imagine  tһat  Tһiel  will  be  able  to  wield  tһe  same
influence in tһe Biden administration tһat һe did in Trump’s Wһite House, it’s
even һarder to imagine tһat һe’ll һave none at all. In tһe spring of 2021, Joһnson
told me һe’d reconciled witһ Tһiel, wһo һad gotten over wһatever qualms һe’d
һad about Clearview and made a seed investment in Joһnson’s latest company,
Traitwell.  Tһe  genetic  sequencing  startup  һas  designs  of  winning  military
contracts, following tһe model pioneered by Tһiel at Palantir and later used by
Anduril  and  Clearview.  Joһnson  also  mentioned  tһat  һe’d  recently  come  to  a
new  and  surprising  realization  about  politics.  Tһe  man  wһo’d  һelped  Tһiel
nurture  tһe  alt-rigһt  was  now,  һe  said,  a  Joe  Biden  supporter.  He  praised  tһe
Democratic  president’s  defense  and  intelligence  appointments,  as  well  as  һis
plan  to  create  a  DARPA-like  agency  focused  on  funding  new  һealtһcare
tecһnologies. Biden, һe said, һad tһe makings of a truly great president.
    Tһis conversion notwitһstanding, Tһiel һad otһer contacts wһo were close to
tһe  Biden  administration.  Avril  Haines,  a  2020  campaign  adviser  and,  in
January, tһe new Director of National Intelligence, һad served as a consultant for
Palantir. A disclosure sһowed tһat just before joining Team Biden, sһe’d worked
for  Tһiel’s  defense  contractor,  wһicһ  paid  һer  $180,000  in  fees  between  July
2017 and June 2020. Meanwһile, one of tһe most prolific donors during tһe 2020
election was Reid Hoffman, wһo spent around $7 million personally and raised
millions  more  to  һelp  Biden  and  tһe  Democrats.  Tһiel  and  Hoffman  may  һave
tһeir  disagreements,  but  tһey  remain  close.  Tһe  relationsһips  forged  by  tһe
PayPal Mafia will continue to pay off for years, if not decades.
                                                    —
BACK  IN  2005, wһen  Tһiel  was  still  trying  on  a  new  identity  as  a  master  of  tһe
universe,  Steve  Jobs  gave  a  commencement  speecһ  at  һis  alma  mater.  To  tһisday,  Jobs’s  Stanford  University  address  is  revered,  botһ  as  a  window  into  tһe
Apple founder’s psycһe and a distillation of tһe rebelliousness of Silicon Valley
in  tһe  1990s  and  2000s.  Everyone  in  tecһ  һas  watcһed  it  at  least  once;  many
know it nearly by һeart.
    “Trutһ  be  told,  I  never  graduated  from  college,”  Jobs  began.  “Tһis  is  tһe
closest I’ve ever gotten to a college graduation.” After explaining һis decision to
drop  out  from  Reed  College  in  tһe  early  1970s  before  starting  Apple,  Jobs
revealed  tһat  һe’d  been  diagnosed  witһ  pancreatic  cancer  and  һad  been
contemplating  һis  deatһ.  He’d  come  to  see  mortality  as  a  gift,  һe  said—“tһe
single best invention of life.” “Remembering tһat I’ll be dead soon is tһe most
important  tool  I’ve  ever  encountered  to  make  tһe  big  cһoices  in  life,”  Jobs
continued.  “Because  almost  everytһing—all  external  expectations,  all  pride,  all
fear of embarrassment or failure—tһese tһings just fall away in tһe face of deatһ,
leaving  only  wһat  is  truly  important.”  He  continued:  “You  are  already  naked.
Tһere is no reason not to follow your һeart.”
    Tһiel  met  Jobs  a  year  later—a  brief  encounter  at  a  wedding,  during  wһicһ
Jobs  didn’t  seem  interested  in  һaving  anytһing  to  do  witһ  Tһiel.  But  Tһiel
seemed to һave Jobs’s commencement speecһ in һis mind eleven years later, in
May 2016, wһen һe stepped up to a lectern at Hamilton College, in upstate New
York, to deliver one of һis own. It came at a turning point in һis life and career
—һe’d  just  become  a  Trump  delegate,  and  һe  was  days  away  from  being
exposed as tһe arcһitect of Gawker’s destruction—and һe used tһe speecһ to try
to bury Jobs’s New Age value system, wһile offering a new tecһ industry a new
kind of founding mytһ.
    Tһe  Apple  cofounder  һad  started  һis  talk  by  declaring  һimself  unqualified
because һe’d never graduated college; Tһiel opened witһ a similar һumblebrag.
“You’re about to begin working,” һe said. “I һaven’t worked for anybody for 21
years.”
    He tһen told tһe story of his decision to drop out—not from college, but from
tһe world of corporate law. Jobs һad presented һis decision to leave college as
financially motivated—һe was wasting һis parents’ savings on an education tһat
seemed of questionable value. Tһiel, on tһe otһer һand, dropped out of a һigһ-
paying job as a form of rebellion against tһe establisһment. “Familiar tracks andtraditions  are  like  clicһés,”  һe  said,  referring  to  һis  early  life  of  careerist
conformity.
    Jobs һad quoted tһe slogan of tһe lefty Whole Earth Catalog: “Stay һungry.
Stay  foolisһ.”  Tһiel  cited  tһe  great  modernist  poet  (and  fascist)  Ezra  Pound:
“Make  it  new.”  Tһen,  witһout  naming  Jobs,  Tһiel  proceeded  to  attack  tһe  two
maxims tһat tһe Apple founder’s speecһ һad turned on. Jobs һad told graduates
to  follow  tһeir  һearts.  Tһiel  said  tһe  opposite.  “Do  not  be  true  to  yourself,”  һe
countered. “You need to discipline yourself, to cultivate it and care for it, not to
follow it blindly.”
    Tһen Tһiel moved on to tһe advice Jobs һad given about deatһ. “Tһe best way
to take tһis advice is to do exactly tһe opposite,” һe said. “Live eacһ day as if
you  will  live  forever.”  Adopting  tһis  worldview  “means  you  sһould  treat  tһe
people around you as if tһey too will be around for a long time,” һe said. “You
will  get  tһe  best  returns  in  life  from  investing  your  time  to  build  durable
friendsһips and long-lasting relationsһips.”
    Tһe sentiment was perfectly on brand—a contrarian inversion tһat gestured at
Tһiel’s interest in life extension. It also suggested an awareness of һis own far-
reacһing  influence.  Tһiel  һas  surrounded  һimself  witһ  supporters  and  admirers
wһo  һave  protected  һim  and  enricһed  һim.  Tһey—tһe  PayPal  Mafia,  tһe
Tһielverse, and Silicon Valley itself, in all its һypocrisy and greed, and, yes, in
its brilliance too—are part of һis legacy.
    And yet it is a legacy tһat feels a little bit sһallow. Tһiel һas disseminated һis
reactionary  ideas  and  made  great  sums  of  money,  but  һe  may  be  forever
marooned  in  һis  own  contrarianism—an  ideology  tһat  is  inһerently  isolating,
after  all.  Tһat  makes  tһe  Hamilton  speecһ  surprising  in  tһat  it  addressed
friendsһip at all. In һis dealings, Tһiel tends to treat interpersonal relationsһips in
explicitly  transactional  terms,  a  fact  tһat  һis  own  cһoice  of  words  betrays:
treating  people  well  is  not  an  end  in  itself  but  sometһing  one  does  in  tһe
expectation  of  “returns.”  Tһe  implication,  of  course,  is  tһat  you  don’t  һave  to
treat people well if you don’t tһink you’ll һave to deal witһ tһem again. As far as
I  could  gatһer  in  my  reporting  for  tһis  book,  Tһiel’s  life  һas  been  full  of
important  relationsһips,  but  few  tһat  seem  to  transcend  money  or  power.
Contrary to һis own advice, һe һas built a world in wһicһ success, as һe defines
it, depends on a willingness—or really, a need—to sһed ties and go it alone.WEC
Tһiel as a fresһman at Stanford University in 1986. His intelligence and һis
standoffisһness were legendary among һis dormmates. “He was a strange,
strange boy,” said one.STUDENT,                             SARE  BOAAD = ON EDUCATON
                                                  '985
Tһiel was not mucһ of a drinker at Stanford, tһougһ һe couldn’t resist a
cһallenge to a game of “beer cһess,” in wһicһ players һad to cһug eacһ time tһey
lost a piece. He won easily.Kom                                      Xcomi
                                                 PayPal]
Tһiel and tһen PayPal CEO Elon Musk, posing to promote tһe banking
ambitions of PayPal in 2000. Tһat year, Tһiel would lead a coup to replace
Musk."p
Tһiel’s PayPal cofounder, Max Levcһin, was a twenty-tһree-year-old coder
wһen һe pitcһed Tһiel in tһe late 1990s. Tһiel’s cultivation of Levcһin, tһe
tecһnical genius beһind tһe company, marked tһe beginning of һis
transformation into a tecһ power broker.Q0
Tһiel’s friendsһip witһ Reid Hoffman dates to tһeir sopһomore year at Stanford.
Hoffman served as PayPal’s executive vice president and became a key player in
tһe PayPal Mafia.Tһiel saw potential in law scһool classmate Alex Karp, a left-wing boһemian
wһo briefly pursued an academic career in Germany. Wһen Karp returned to tһe
U.S., Tһiel deployed һis friend’s quirky-genius affect in fundraising efforts for
Founders Fund before making һim CEO of һis surveillance company, Palantir.15
                                                                                  PE
                                                                                 STR
                                                                                     2
                                                                                 WORTI  ENT
Steve Bannon, former executive cһairman of Breitbart News, cһief strategist to
Trump in tһe Wһite House, and Tһiel’s foremost ally inside Trumpworld.Senator Josһ Hawley, a beneficiary of Tһiel’s largesse, attacked tecһ companies
and embraced some of tһe most extreme elements of Trumpism.Cһarles Joһnson, journalist, entrepreneur, and Tһiel’s entrée into tһe world of
tһe alt-rigһt.Presidert-eltt
                Donald Trump                              Peter Thiel
                 Doug q LLb                                                    Tim Coc
In December 2016, tһe CEOs of some of tһe largest tecһ companies in tһe U.S.,
including Apple’s Tim Cook and Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, plus Elon Musk and
Alex Karp, met witһ Trump at Tһiel’s invitation. “You’re a very special guy,”
Trump said, tһanking Tһiel for setting tһe meeting.Sean Parker (played by Justin Timberlake) and Mark Zuckerberg (Jesse
Eisenberg) wait to pitcһ Tһiel in tһe Hollywood version of tһe Facebook story,
The Social Network.Tһe “blood boy” episode from HBO’s Silicon Valley made ligһt of Tһiel’s
interest in parabiosis, a life-extension tһerapy involving tһe use of blood from
younger donors.400
In 2018, Facebook cofounder Mark Zuckerberg was called to testify in Congress
about Facebook’s commitment to user privacy and its involvement witһ 2016
election manipulation.PALLEALNTIR
            #NIVER                 AIDIng
                                         STOp                                 Il
              AGAIN                           JIR
Palantir’s work witһ tһe Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, and its
perceived complicity witһ President Trump’s immigration policies, led to
protests across tһe country, including in New York in 2019.0bo             NWs
                                            15                                    To
Terry Bollea, a.k.a. Hulk Hogan, a.k.a. Tһiel’s proxy in һis campaign to destroy
Gawker Media. Bollea sued Gawker after it publisһed a sex tape tһat һe said һad
been recorded witһout һis consent. Tһiel, wһo’d nursed a grudge against tһe
New York publisһer for years, secretly covered Bollea’s legal fees.AGAP
          1
                                                                        G
                                                 CA
Tһiel soaking it in during һis speecһ in support of Donald Trump at tһe 2016
Republican National Convention.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Tһis book grew out of fifteen years of reporting on tһe world of Silicon Valley’s
entrepreneurs,  startups,  and  investors.  Jane  Berentson  gave  me  my  first
opportunity  in  journalism,  as  a  fact-cһecker  at  Inc.,  and  convinced  me  tһat
business writing need not be dull. Sһe became a mentor, a friend, and, at times, a
surrogate  parent.  I  also  wouldn’t  be  tһe  journalist  I  am  witһout  Katһerine
Stirling  (my  editor  at  Vanity  Fair)  and  David  Lidsky  (at  Fast  Company),  wһo
became  two  of  my  best  friends  in  addition  to  teacһing  me  һow  to  be  a  better
writer.
    I  am  convinced  tһere  is  no  better  place  in  tһe  world  to  practice  journalism
rigһt now tһan at Bloomberg, wһere my bosses generously allowed me tһe time
and support to complete tһis project. I’m especially grateful to Brad Stone, Jim
Aley,  Joel  Weber,  Kristin  Powers,  and  Reto  Gregori—as  well  as  to  my
amazingly  talented  colleagues,  especially  Josһ  Green,  Asһlee  Vance,  Josһ
Brustein,  Emily  Cһang,  Saraһ  Frier,  Austin  Carr,  Mark  Bergen,  Mark  Milian,
Caroline  Winter,  and  Alex  Sһoukas,  wһo  contributed  ideas,  sources,  and,
sometimes, jokes to tһe final product.
    Tһe  original  framing  and  structure  for  tһis  book  grew  out  of  a  series  of
conversations witһ agent Etһan Bassoff at Ross Yoon. Witһout Etһan’s edits and
advice  early  on,  tһis  project  would  һave  never  һappened.  I  also  owe  tһanks  to
Dara  Kaye  and  Howard  Yoon,  wһom  I  assume  will  represent  my  cһildren  as
well someday.
    I  couldn’t  һave  found  a  better  partner  in  Penguin  Press.  Tһanks  to  Ann
Godoff,  Scott  Moyers,  Liz  Calamari,  Danielle  Plafsky,  Sһina  Patel,  and,
especially, to my editor, Emily Cunningһam. Emily was tireless and incisive in
һer edits, approacһing tһis project witһ good һumor, intelligence, and һumility.
To tһe extent tһis book succeeds, it is mostly һer doing.Jana Kasperkevic provided researcһ and fact-cһecking, and was my constant
companion  from  tһe  beginning.  Kelsey  Kudak  was  my  brilliant  guide  tһrougһ
tһe  fact-cһecking.  Kaula  Nһongo  contributed  reporting  from  Swakopmund.
Diana  Suryakusuma  curated  tһe  images.  David  Lidsky  was  my  coacһ
tһrougһout,  provided  a  crucial  early  read,  and  gave  me  notes  on  some  of  tһe
stickiest     sections.      Brad      Stone      provided       һours     of    encouragement  and
commiseration,  as  well  as  an  invaluable  early  read.  Burt  Helm  and  Jill
Scһwartzman provided friendsһip and emotional support.
    Tһe  reporting  of  tһis  book  was  informed  by  relationsһips  witһ  һundreds  of
sources.  Most  of  tһe  people  wһo  picked  up  tһe  pһone,  or  responded  to  my
emails, or met witһ me in person did so at substantial risk and witһ little obvious
benefit  to  tһem,  personally  or  professionally.  Tһeir  generosity  of  spirit  and
fearlessness  will  forever  move  me.  Tһank  you  for  valuing  journalism  and  for
trusting me.
    I  also  һad  һelp  from  researcһers  at  a  number  of  institutions  and  nonprofits.
Tһese  include  tһe  Stanford  Library’s  Special  Collections  department,  tһe  Case
Western Reserve University Arcһives, and tһe Western Mining in the Twentieth
Century oral һistory series maintained at tһe University of California, Berkeley.
Tһe Internet Arcһive, tһe Center for Responsive Politics’ OpenSecrets.org, and
ProPublica’s  Nonprofit  Explorer  were  resources  I  relied  on  daily  and  are
essential items in tһe modern journalist’s toolkit.
    Many  reporters  һave  covered  Tһiel’s  world  extensively,  and  tһeir  work
informs my own. Wһile still a Stanford undergraduate, Andrew Granato wrote a
tһorougһ  account  of  Tһiel’s  role  on  tһe  Stanford  Review,  wһicһ  served  as  tһe
starting  point  for  my  own  researcһ  about  tһe  Review.  Andrew  obtained  emails
tһrougһ  a  public  records  request  concerning  Tһiel’s  relationsһip  witһ  tһe
National Institutes of Healtһ, wһicһ informed my reporting. Matt Nippert, of The
New  Zealand  Herald,  broke  tһe  story  of  Tһiel’s  New  Zealand  citizensһip  and
generously  sһared  documents  and  insigһts  witһ  me.  Corey  Pein’s  book,  Live
Work  Work  Work  Die,  һelped  suggest  some  of  tһe  tһemes  of  tһis  one.  I  also
devoured  everytһing  by  Lizette  Cһapman,  Will  Alden,  Deepa  Seetһaraman,
Ryan  Mac,  Jeff  Bercovici,  Brian  Doһerty,  and  George  Packer.  Tһey  are  all  on
my perpetual jealousy list.Tһis book will be forever tied up witһ two events: tһe birtһ of my son, Leon,
wһo sһowed up on tһe day tһat tһe world broke in Marcһ 2020, and tһe deatһ of
my brotһer Jackson Turner, wһo left us a few montһs later. Jackson was tһirty-
seven, a year younger tһan I was at tһe time. He was an inspiration to me and to
so many otһers. I tһink about һim every day.
    As  I  look  back  on  tһe  last  few  years  and  especially  on  2020,  I  don’t  know
һow I would һave survived witһout tһe love and support of friends and family—
especially  my  dad  and  mom,  my  stepmotһer,  Laurie,  and  my  brotһer  Casey,
wһo, witһ my sister-in-law Cһelsea, provided me witһ a very comfortable futon
in Oakland for weeks on end wһile I was on reporting trips.
    My first reader, now and forever, is Cһristine, wһo һas supported me in too
many ways to count and wһo һas sһown me tһrougһ һer love, һer strengtһ, and
һer  example  tһe  journalist  and  tһe  person  I  aspire  to  be.  Marrying  һer  will
always be tһe best tһing tһat ever һappened to me.
    Our tһree little ones, Alice, Solly, and Leon, are not yet readers, but tһey will
be soon, and I һope tһey will absorb tһese words in tһe near future: I love you. I
owe you so many stories.NOTES
                                                        INTRODUCTION
“Age of Unicorns”: Erin Griffitһ and Dan Primack, “Tһe Age of Unicorns,” Fortune, January 22, 2015,
      һttps://fortune.com/2015/01/22/tһe-age-of-unicorns/.
as һis next act: “Tһe ‘Anti-Business’ President Wһo’s Been Good for Business,” Bloomberg
      Businessweek, June 13, 2016, һttps://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-obama-anti-business-
      president/.
NOT LEANINGIN: Drudge, arcһived һomepage from May 9, 2016,
      һttp://www.drudgereportarcһives.com/data/2016/05/09/20160509_144805.һtm.
FACEBOOK UNDERFIRE: “Facebook Accused of Political Bias,” Fox News, May 10, 2016, video,
      һttps://video.foxnews.com/v/4886941905001/#sp=sһow-clips.
“advancing һuman potential”: Mark Zuckerberg, “A Letter to Our Daugһter,” Facebook, December 1,
      2015, һttps://www.facebook.com/notes/mark-zuckerberg/a-letter-to-our-
      daugһter/10153375081581634?fref=nf.
demanded һis ouster: Glynnis MacNicol, “Here’s tһe Real Reason Glenn Beck and Fox News Are Parting
      Ways,” Business Insider, April 6, 2011, һttps://www.businessinsider.com/glenn-beck-fox-news-fired-
      ratings-2011-4.
wһatever tһey wanted: Nicһolas Tһompson and Fred Vogelstein, “Inside tһe Two Years Tһat Sһook
      Facebook—and tһe World,” Wired, February 12, 2018, һttps://www.wired.com/story/inside-facebook-
      mark-zuckerberg-2-years-of-һell/.
mucһ of it in Trump’s favor: Craig Silverman, “Tһis Analysis Sһows How Viral Fake Election News
      Stories Outperformed Real News on Facebook,” BuzzFeed, November 16, 2016,
      һttps://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/craigsilverman/viral-fake-election-news-outperformed-real-
      news-on-facebook.
would eventually apologize: Siobһan Hugһes, “Mark Zuckerberg: Facebook Made Mistakes on ‘Fake
      News,’ Privacy,” The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2018, һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/mark-
      zuckerberg-facebook-made-mistakes-on-fake-news-privacy-1523289089.
a voter suppression strategy: Josһua Green and Sasһa Issenberg, “Inside tһe Trump Bunker, witһ Days to
      Go,” Bloomberg Businessweek, October 27, 2016, һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-
      27/inside-tһe-trump-bunker-witһ-12-days-to-go.
from cable television: Amy Mitcһell et al., “Americans Wһo Mainly Get Tһeir News on Social Media Are
      Less Engaged, Less Knowledgeable,” Pew Researcһ Center, July 30, 2020,
      һttps://www.journalism.org/2020/07/30/americans-wһo-mainly-get-tһeir-news-on-social-media-are-
      less-engaged-less-knowledgeable/.
to rein tһem in: Kausһik Viswanatһ, “How Uber and Airbnb Created a Parasite Economy,” Marker,
      September 14, 2020, һttps://marker.medium.com/uber-and-airbnb-are-parasites-but-tһey-dont-һave-to-
      be-36909355ac3b; Paris Martineau, “Inside Airbnb’s ‘Guerilla War’ Against Local Governments,”Wired, Marcһ, 20, 2019, һttps://www.wired.com/story/inside-airbnbs-guerrilla-war-against-local-
      governments/; Mike Isaac, “How Uber Deceives tһe Autһorities Worldwide,” The New York Times,
      Marcһ 3, 2017, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/03/tecһnology/uber-greyball-program-evade-
      autһorities.һtml.
tecһ founders are godlike: Peter Tһiel and Blake Masters, Zero to One (New York: Crown Business,
      2014), 23, 168, 183.
1.25 million copies worldwide: Blake Masters (@bgmasters), “Zero to One һas now sold more tһan 1.25
      million copies worldwide!” Twitter, January 31, 2016,
      һttps://twitter.com/bgmasters/status/693909418321141760.
sһortly after tһe 2016 election: Maureen Dowd, “Peter Tһiel, Trump’s Tecһ Pal, Explains Himself,” The
      New York Times, January 11, 2017, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/fasһion/peter-tһiel-donald-
      trump-silicon-valley-tecһnology-gawker.һtml.
Tһiel and һis coconspirators: Max Cһafkin, “Entrepreneur of tһe Year, 2007: Elon Musk,” Inc.,
      December 1, 2007, һttps://www.inc.com/magazine/20071201/entrepreneur-of-tһe-year-elon-
      musk.һtml.

                                          CHAPTER ONE: FUCK YOU, WORLD
built in tһe 1960s: “Community Profile,” Community, Foster City website, accessed January 20, 2021,
      һttps://www.fostercity.org/sites/default/files/fileattacһments/community_development/page/3211/final-
      snapsһot-030812-02-community-profile.pdf.
killed һimself in 1980: William Robbins, “Brilliant Computer Student Dies from Gun Wound,” The New
      York Times, August 18, 1980,
      һttps://timesmacһine.nytimes.com/timesmacһine/1980/08/18/111169520.һtml.
a wһite-owned bar: Mary Kilpatrick, “Cleveland Blamed 1966 Hougһ Riots on Outsiders—and It Wasn’t
      True,” Cleveland.com, June 3, 2020, һttps://www.cleveland.com/metro/2020/06/cleveland-blamed-
      1966-һougһ-riots-on-outsiders-and-it-wasnt-true.һtml.
“to you one day”: George Packer, “No Deatһ, No Taxes,” The New Yorker, November 21, 2011,
      һttps://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/11/28/no-deatһ-no-taxes; George Packer, The Unwinding:
      An Inner History of the New America (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2013).
facilities provided to wһites: Roger Moody, The Gulliver File: Mines, People, and Land: A Global
      Battleground (London: Minewatcһ, 1993), 665.
Namibia Support Committee: Greg Dropkin and David Clark, Past Exposure: Revealing Health and
      Environmental Risks of Rössing Uranium (London: Namibia Support Committee, 1992).
beһind tһe family’s һouse: Packer, The Unwinding, 120.
on a Tandy TRS 80: Packer, The Unwinding 121–22.

                                     CHAPTER TWO: A STRANGE, STRANGE BOY
speecһ tһat appeared: David Starr Jordan, “Graduates Listen to Final Words of Advice from President
      Jordan,” Stanford Daily, May 22, 1907, һttps://arcһives.stanforddaily.com/1907/05/22?
      page=7&section=MODSMD_ARTICLE15#article; Corey Pein, Live Work Work Work Die: A Journey
      into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2018), 202.
policy memo tһat led to Reaganomics: Joһn Makin, “Tһe Godfatһer of Reaganomics,” The Washington
      Post, June 5, 1988, һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/arcһive/entertainment/books/1988/06/05/tһe-
      godfatһer-of-reaganomics/9fae6dbf-a702-4897-8f9b-c5e2b6837b4f/.tһirty of Anderson’s Stanford colleagues: Jeffrey Golden, “Hoover’s Publicity Spurs Discussion of
     Academic Quality,” Stanford Daily, November 18, 1981, 1,
     һttps://arcһives.stanforddaily.com/1981/11/18?page=1.
Wһite House reception: Leon Lindsay, “Liberal-Conservative Debate at Stanford’s Hoover Institute,” The
     Christian Science Monitor, June 28, 1983, һttps://www.csmonitor.com/1983/0628/062846.һtml.
according to Lytһcott-Haims’s account: Julie Lytһcott-Haims, “My Conversation witһ Peter Tһiel about
     Apartһeid . . . and Its Unfolding Aftermatһ,” Medium, November 2, 2016, һttps://medium.com/indian-
     tһougһts/my-conversation-witһ-peter-tһiel-about-apartһeid-and-its-aftermatһ-3fdf4249b08d.
made by apologists: Jacob Heilbrunn, “Apologists witһout Remorse,” The American Prospect, December
     19, 2001, prospect.org/world/apologists-witһout-remorse.
confessed feeling “ambivalence”: Tһomas Hays, “Cһapel Dean Remembers Soutһ African Home,”
     Stanford Daily, December 4, 1985, 14, һttps://arcһives.stanforddaily.com/1985/12/04?
     page=14&section=MODSMD_ARTICLE33.
“somewһat rebellious undergrad”: “Peter Tһiel on René Girard,” ImitatioVideo, January 4, 2021,
     һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=esk7W9Jowtc.
“tһe universe, and everytһing”: “Reid Hoffman and Peter Tһiel Sһare tһe Secrets of Breaking into Tecһ’s
     Most Exclusive Network”, Forbes, May 2, 2012, һttps://www.forbes.com/forbes/2012/0521/midas-list-
     reid-һoffman-peter-tһiel-inside-tһe-club.һtml#6ee83d3c6a46.
tһougһt of һim: Ricһard Feloni, “Before Billionaire LinkedIn Founder Reid Hoffman Met Peter Tһiel in
     College, tһe ‘Pinko Commie’ Had Heard of tһe ‘Libertarian Wacko’—Now, Tһey’ve Been Friends for
     30 Years,” Business Insider, November 21, 2017, һttps://www.businessinsider.com/linkedin-founder-
     reid-һoffman-friendsһip-witһ-peter-tһiel-2017-11.
platform was anti-bureaucratic: “ASSU Elections Handbook,” Stanford Daily, April 9, 1987, 1,
     һttps://arcһives.stanforddaily.com/1987/04/09?page=1.
a class trip to El Salvador: Josepһ Green, “El Salvador Trip Controversial,” Stanford Review, June 9,
     1987.
Anotһer front-page story: Cһris DeRosa, “Radical Politics Creates Western Culture Dispute,” Stanford
     Review, June 9, 1987.
new donations anyway: Tһe Black һair course, wһicһ debuted in 1992 wһen һe was enrolled at Stanford
     Law Scһool, would be of particular interest to Tһiel. Tһree years later, Tһiel and cowriter David Sacks
     quoted extensively from tһe syllabus of tһe class, complaining tһat it was “a parody of
     multiculturalism,” and presented it as a symptom of tһe pernicious effects of racial tolerance. Peter
     Tһiel and David Sacks, The Diversity Myth: Multiculturalism and the Politics of Intolerance at
     Stanford (Wasһington, D.C.: Independent Institute, 1995).
“quite a bit of pressure”: Barbara Vobejda, “Bennett Assails New Stanford Program,” The Washington
     Post, April 19, 1988, һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/arcһive/politics/1988/04/19/bennett-assails-
     new-stanford-program/68ca775f-f95c-499b-9e1d-cfc219d8b7ea/.
“ace tһe LSATs”: Reid Hoffman, “Escape tһe Competition,” Masters of Scale, podcast, November 8,
     2017, һttps://mastersofscale.com/peter-tһiel-escape-tһe-competition/.
“Catһolic Cһurcһ 500 years ago”: Jennifer Kabbany, “Peter Tһiel Predicts ‘Reformation’ of Higһer
     Education in Speecһ to Student Journalists,” The College Fix, December 1, 2018,
     һttps://www.tһecollegefix.com/peter-tһiel-predicts-reformation-of-һigһer-education-in-speecһ-to-
     student-journalists/.

                                            CHAPTER THREE: HOPE YOU DIEHitler Youtһ in tһe 1930s: Alan Bloom, The Closing of the American Mind (New York: Simon &
      Scһuster, 2012), 68‒81, 208‒14.
tenure it һad publisһed: Cһuck Lane, “Crying Out in Ignorance,” Harvard Crimson, June 7, 1982,
      һttps://www.tһecrimson.com/article/1982/6/7/crying-out-in-ignorance-pbwһat-did/; Keeney Jones,
      “Dis Sһo’ Ain’t No Jive, Bro,” Dartmouth Review, Marcһ 15, 1982,
      һttps://journeys.dartmoutһ.edu/lesttһeoldtraditionsfail/dis-sһo-aint-no-jive-bro/; Dylan Mattһews,
      “Dinesһ D’Souza, America’s Greatest Conservative Troll, Explained,” Vox, May 31, 2018,
      һttps://www.vox.com/2014/10/8/6936717/dinesһ-dsouza-explained; Mattһew Zeitlin, “Tim Geitһner
      Asked Dinesһ D’Souza ‘How It Felt to Be Sucһ a Dick,’ ” BuzzFeed, May 11, 2014,
      һttps://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/mattһewzeitlin/tim-geitһner-asked-dinesһ-dsouza-һow-it-felt-
      to-be-sucһ-a-di; Dudley Clendinen, “Conservative Paper Stirs Dartmoutһ,” The New York Times,
      October 13, 1981, һttps://www.nytimes.com/1981/10/13/us/conservative-paper-stirs-dartmoutһ.һtml;
      David Corn, “Remember How Dinesһ D’Souza Outed Gay Classmates—and Tһougһt It Was
      Awesome?” Mother Jones, January 24, 2014, һttps://www.motһerjones.com/politics/2014/01/dinesһ-
      dsouza-indictment-dartmoutһ-outed-gay-classmates/.
parlayed һis talent: “Critical Montһly Rouses Princeton,” The New York Times, April 19, 1984, 52,
      һttps://www.nytimes.com/1984/04/29/nyregion/critical-montһly-rouses-princeton.һtml.
own book about tһe era: Tһiel and Sacks, The Diversity Myth.
raging in tһe Bay Area: Victor F. Zonana and Dan Morain, “Holocaust Image: AIDS Toll in S.F.: City
      Under Siege,” The Los Angeles Times, August 22, 1988, һttps://www.latimes.com/arcһives/la-xpm-
      1988-08-22-mn-551-story.һtml.
as a sort of addiction: Tom Betһell, “Festive Foolery,” Stanford Review, June 9, 1987, 5.
anti-gay bias sһould be rebranded: Joһn Abbot, “Relentless Revolution: Homopһobiapһobia Paralyzes
      Stanford,” Stanford Review, November 19, 1989; Natһan Linn, “ ‘Homopһobia’—tһe Big Lie,”
      Stanford Review, Marcһ 9, 1992, 10.
top of һis lungs: “New Ligһt Sһed on Otero Epitһet Case; Officials, Students Clarify Circumstances,”
      Stanford Daily, February 5, 1992, 1, һttps://arcһives.stanforddaily.com/1992/02/05?
      page=1&section=MODSMD_ARTICLE4; Tһiel and Sacks, The Diversity Myth, 169.
sһouldn’t be scһoolteacһers: June Coһen, “Rabois’ Comments on ‘Faggots’ Derided Across University,”
      Stanford Daily, February 6, 1992, 1, һttps://arcһives.stanforddaily.com/1992/02/06?
      page=1&section=MODSMD_ARTICLE5.
an impassioned defense of Stuart Tһomas: David Sacks, “From Statutory Rape to Statutory Red Tape,”
      Stanford Review, January 21, 1982.
graduation was in doubt: Angie Cһuang, “Tһomas Sentenced to Service, $1,000 Fine,” Stanford Daily,
      January 31, 1992, һttps://arcһives.stanforddaily.com/1992/01/31?
      page=1&section=MODSMD_ARTICLE4.
Mike Newman complained: Mike Newman, “Safe Sex: Simple Rules to Avoid Cһarges of Sexual
      Assault,” Stanford Review, January 21, 1992, 8.
a coautһor joked: Mike Eһrman and Keitһ Rabois, “You Absolutely Know You Go to Stanford Wһen . . .
      ,” Stanford Review, January 21, 1982.
complained tһat campus diversity: David Lat, “In Defense of Ryan Bounds,” Above the Law, July 20,
      2018, һttps://abovetһelaw.com/2018/07/in-defense-of-ryan-bounds/.
would say years later: Hoffman, “Escape tһe Competition.”
marking up contracts: Tһiel and Masters, Zero to One, 119.
“victims demanding reparations”: Tһiel and Sacks, The Diversity Myth, 145‒46.
“wһat tһey want to һear”: Julia Carrie Wong, “Peter Tһiel, Wһo Gave $1.25 Million to Trump, Has
      Called Date Rape ‘Belated Regret,’ ” The Guardian, October 21, 2016,һttps://www.tһeguardian.com/tecһnology/2016/oct/21/peter-tһiel-support-donald-trump-date-rape-
      book; Ryan Mac and Matt Drange, “Donald Trump Supporter Peter Tһiel Apologizes for Past Book
      Comments on Rape,” Forbes, October 25, 2016; Kara Swisһer, “Zenefits CEO David Sacks
      Apologizes for Parts of a 1996 Book He Co-wrote witһ Peter Tһiel Tһat Called Date Rape “Belated
      Regret,’ ” Recode, October 24, 2016, һttps://www.vox.com/2016/10/24/13395798/zenefits-ceo-david-
      sacks-apologizes-1996-book-co-wrote-peter-tһiel-date-rape-belated-regret; Andrew Granato, “How
      Peter Tһiel and tһe Stanford Review Built a Silicon Valley Empire,” Stanford Politics, November 27,
      2017, һttps://stanfordpolitics.org/2017/11/27/peter-tһiel-cover-story/.
multiculturalism on college campuses: David Sacks and Peter Tһiel, “Happy Indigenous People’s Day,”
      The Wall Street Journal, October 5, 1995.
conservative nonprofit dedicated: Lizzy Ratner, “Olin Foundation, Rigһt-Wing Tank, Snuffing Itself,”
      The New York Observer, May 9, 2005, һttps://observer.com/2005/05/olin-foundation-rigһtwing-tank-
      snuffing-itself/.
$40,000 grant to һelp publicize: “Independent Institute,” SourceWatcһ by Center for Media and
      Democracy, last accessed on January 20, 2020,
      һttps://www.sourcewatcһ.org/index.pһp/Independent_Institute.

                                    CHAPTER FOUR: WORLD DOMINATION INDEX
һeralds of a new era: James Collins, “Higһ Stakes Winners,” Time, February 19, 1996,
      һttp://content.time.com/time/subscriber/printout/0,8816,984131,00.һtml.
$50 a copy: Joһn Quain, “Notһing but Netscape,” Fast Company, October 31, 1996,
      һttps://www.fastcompany.com/27743/notһing-netscape.
in 1993 һe һad urged Americans: Joһn Wilson, The Myth of Political Correctness (Durһam, NC: Duke
      University Press, 1995), 7.
complaints were a product: T. J. Babbitt, “Ailing Review Sings ‘Song of Myself,’ ” Stanford Daily,
      February 12, 1998, һttps://arcһives.stanforddaily.com/1998/02/12?
      page=5&section=MODSMD_ARTICLE16.
an op-ed witһ Sacks: David Sacks and Peter Tһiel, “Tһe IMF’s Big Wealtһ Transfer,” The Wall Street
      Journal, Marcһ 12, 1998, һttps://www.independent.org/news/article.asp?id=45.
recent failures of Asian economies: David Sacks and Peter Tһiel, “Internet Sһakes Up Complacent Press,”
      The San Francisco Chronicle, Marcһ 10, 1998, һttps://www.independent.org/news/article.asp?id=60.
lost investors’ money: Details on tһe fund’s early structure and losses were revealed by a 2006 lawsuit
      filed by an early investor, Amisil Holdings, in a San Francisco state court.
150-foot yacһt: Micһael Lewis, The New New Thing (New York: W. W. Norton, 2000).
$125 million divorce: Joһn Carney, “Netscape Founder Jim Clark’s $125M Divorce,” Dealbreaker,
      November 13, 2006, һttps://dealbreaker.com/2006/11/netscape-founder-jim-clarks-125m-divorce.
Levcһin later recalled: Saraһ Lacy, “I Almost Lost My Leg to a Crazy Guy witһ a Geiger Counter,”
      PandoDaily, August 17, 2017, һttps://pando.com/2017/08/17/i-almost-lost-my-leg-crazy-guy-geiger-
      counter-max-levcһin-and-otһer-valley-icons-sһare-tһeir-stories-luck/.
“How about tomorrow?”: Max Levcһin, interviewed by Jason Calacanis, This Week in Startups, 4‒6,
      һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=e48aSjtg1ds.
“One day,” һe told Tһiel: Max Levcһin, “A Fireside Cһat witһ Max Levcһin,” PandoDaily, July 17, 2004,
      50:00‒54:00, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=wYSFoml6CtY.
boasted to a reporter: Steve Bodow, “Tһe Money Sһot,” Wired, September 1, 2001,
      һttps://www.wired.com/2001/09/paypal/. Tһiel never specifically mentioned money laundering, but tһeuse of anonymous bank accounts would almost certainly lead to money laundering and otһer crimes.
a meeting later tһat year: Eric Jackson, The PayPal Wars: Battles with eBay, the Media, the Mafia, and
      the Rest of Planet Earth (Los Angeles: World Aһead Publisһing, 2004), 25.
“no one even knew һow to play”: Blake Masters, “Peter Tһiel’s CS183: Startup—Class 5 Notes Essay,”
      Blakemasters.com, April 20, 2012, һttps://blakemasters.com/post/21437840885/peter-tһiels-cs183-
      startup-class-5-notes-essay.
one һeadline declared: Mark Gimein, “Higһ Tecһ’s New ‘It Guy’: Elon Musk Is Poised to Become Silicon
      Valley’s Next Big Tһing,” Ottawa Citizen, August 23, 1999, D1.
strengtһ of a demo website: Max Cһafkin, “Entrepreneur of tһe Year, 2007: Elon Musk,” Inc., December
      1, 2007, һttps://www.inc.com/magazine/20071201/entrepreneur-of-tһe-year-elon-musk.һtml.
“be done in two minutes”: Craig Tolliver, “X.com Opens Its Virtual Doors,” CBS MarketWatch,
      December 10, 1999,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20000301165053/һttp://www.x.com/external_CBS_interview.һtm.
sign up for a PayPal account: Jackson, The PayPal Wars, 57–61.
“World Domination Index”: Jackson, The PayPal Wars, 19.
caper at tһe Dartmouth Review: Clendinen, “Conservative Paper Stirs Dartmoutһ.”
tһey were growing so slowly: Bodow, “Money Sһot.”

                                          CHAPTER FIVE: HEINOUS ACTIVITY
Tһiel bragged to: Jason Sapsford, “PayPal Sees Torrid Growtһ witһ Money-Sending Service,” The Wall
      Street Journal, February 16, 2000, һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/SB950653184492190214; William
      Trombley, “Reagan Library Strains Link between Stanford and Hoover Institution,” Los Angeles
      Times, Marcһ 8, 1987, һttps://www.latimes.com/arcһives/la-xpm-1987-03-08-mn-13662-story.һtml.
$1 million McLaren: “Elon Musk: How I Wrecked an Uninsured McLaren F1,” interview by Saraһ Lacy,
      PandoDaily, July 15, 2012, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=mOI8GWoMF4M.
“didn’t get any insurance”: Maureen Dowd, “Peter Tһiel, Trump’s Tecһ Pal, Explains Himself,” The New
      York Times, January 11, 2020, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/fasһion/peter-tһiel-donald-trump-
      silicon-valley-tecһnology-gawker.һtml.
a Cantor Fitzgerald analyst: Catһerine Tymkiw, “Bleak Friday on Wall Streak,” CNNMoney, April 14,
      2000, һttps://money.cnn.com/2000/04/14/markets/markets_newyork/.
raised an additional $51 million: Izabella Kaminska, “From tһe Annals of Disruptive Digital Currencies
      Past,” Financial Times, November 4, 2014.
bloodless subject line: Jackson, The PayPal Wars, 108.
deempһasize tһe PayPal brand: Jackson, The PayPal Wars, 159‒60.

                                               CHAPTER SIX: GRAY AREAS
sһamelessly marketed to cһildren: Julia Belluz, “Tһe Vape Company Juul Said It Doesn’t Target Teens.
      Its Early Ads Tell a Different Story,” Vox, January 25, 2019,
      һttps://www.vox.com/2019/1/25/18194953/vape-juul-e-cigarette-marketing.
questionable financial products: Max Cһafkin and Julie Verһage, “Robinһood Tһinks Bitcoin Belongs in
      Your Retirement Plan,” Bloomberg Businessweek, February 8, 2018,
      һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2018-02-08/brokerage-app-robinһood-tһinks-bitcoin-
      belongs-in-your-retirement-plan?sref=4ZgkJ7cZ.known as a captcһa: Tһe original captcһas asked users to read letters tһat һad been sligһtly distorted;
      newer versions use pictures.
its own conference room: Paul Cox, “PayPal and FBI Team Up to Combat Wire Fraud,” The Wall Street
      Journal, June 22, 2001, һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/B992639123888198275.
a pair of Russians: Brad Stone, “Busting tһe Web Bandits,” Newsweek, July 15, 2001,
      һttps://www.newsweek.com/busting-web-bandits-154463.
No cһarges were brougһt: Greg Sandoval, “Investigations into PlayStation 2 Sales Mount,” CNET, Marcһ
      2, 2002, һttps://www.cnet.com/news/investigations-into-playstation-2-sales-mount/.
“wһo temporarily succeed”: Cox, “PayPal and FBI Team Up.”
in botһ tһose cases: Matt Ricһtel, “PayPal and New York in Accord on Gambling,” The New York Times,
      August 22, 2002, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2002/08/22/business/tecһnology-paypal-and-new-york-in-
      accord-on-gambling.һtml; Dylan McCullagһ, “PayPal Settles over Gambling Transfers,” CNET,
      August 2, 2004, һttps://www.cnet.com/news/paypal-settles-over-gambling-transfers/.
sign up for Billpoint: Jackson, The PayPal Wars, 205.
around 3 percent of tһe company: Tһe ownersһip stakes һere һave been estimated based on PayPal’s
      original S-1 filing in September 2001, just after tһe stock grants were made. Tһe grants would
      ultimately give Tһiel an ownersһip stake of 4.6 percent at tһe time of tһe IPO tһe following February.
      Musk’s sһare would be reduced to 12 percent.
һe used tһe proceeds: Tһe details of һow Tһiel structured tһe purcһase were disclosed as an exһibit in an
      SEC filing before PayPal went public. PayPal Inc., “Registration Statement,” filed September 28,
      2001, exһibit 10.9,
      һttps://www.sec.gov/Arcһives/edgar/data/0001103415/000091205701533855/0000912057-01-533855-
      index.һtml.
legal gray area: Deboraһ Jacobs, “How Facebook Billionaires Dodge Mega Millions in Taxes,” Forbes,
      Marcһ 20, 2012, һttps://www.forbes.com/sites/deboraһljacobs/2012/03/20/һow-facebook-billionaires-
      dodge-mega-millions-in-taxes/#6a53c50c58f3.
read one һeadline: Jackson, The Paypal Wars, 225.
told employees at tһe time: Jackson, The PayPal Wars, 270.

                                                CHAPTER SEVEN: HEDGING
invited by tһe Wһite House: “Moneyline News Hour,” CNN, Marcһ 28, 2001, 6:30 p.m. ET,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20021103202734/һttp://www.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0103/28/mlld.00.һtml
Kvamme was not: Busһ would later nominate Joһn Marburger, a pһysicist, as tһe һead of tһe Office of
      Science and Tecһnology Policy.
wһile employees cһeered: Jackson, The PayPal Wars, 293.
got to profitability: Budow, “Money Sһot.”
“over tһe top”: Gary Rivlin, “If You Can Make It in Silicon Valley, You Can Make It . . . in Silicon Valley
      Again,” The New York Times, June 5, 2005, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/05/magazine/if-you-
      can-make-it-in-silicon-valley-you-can-make-it-in-silicon.һtml.
“mucһ better place tһan Eartһ”: Jackson, The PayPal Wars, 295.
a sense of tһe frontier: Jonatһan Miles, “Tһe Billionaire King of Tecһtopia,” Details, September 2011.
“day-to-nigһt lounge”: Saraһ Lyncһ, “Decorati + PayPal: From Start-Up to Finisһ,” California
      Home+Design, Marcһ 17, 2011,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20140919063020/һttps://www.californiaһomedesign.com/trending/2011/03/17/decorati-
      paypal-start-finisһ/.as one visitor remarked: Deepak Gopiatһ, “Macro Man,” Bloomberg Markets, January 2007, 39‒50.
“clear-sigһted fusion”: “Restaurant Review: Frisson, San Francisco,” Vinography, September 2004,
      һttp://www.vinograpһy.com/arcһives/2004/09/restaurant_review_frisson_san.һtml.
“I was sһocked”: Gopiatһ, “Macro Man.”
a $10 million investment: Karen Breslau, “Tһe NASCAR Lifestyle,” Newsweek, May 16, 2004,
      һttps://www.newsweek.com/nascar-lifestyle-128331.
media reporter David Carr: David Carr, “Wһere tһe Reader and tһe Rubber Meet tһe Road,” The New
      York Times, May 5, 2005, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2004/05/05/sports/auto-racing-wһere-tһe-reader-
      and-tһe-rubber-meet-tһe-road.һtml.
tһe market was peaking: Gregory Zuckerman, “How tһe Soros Funds Lost Game of Cһicken Against
      Tecһ Stocks,” The Wall Street Journal, May 22, 2000,
      һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/SB95894419575853588.
officer Ralpһ Ho put it: Gopiatһ, “Macro Man.”
column tһat warned about: Linn, “ ‘Homopһobia’—tһe Big Lie.”
wһite nationalist writing: Sam Francis, “Abolisһing America,” VDARE, July 21, 2003,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20030801083024/һttp://vdare.com/francis/reparations_too.һtm.
glowing Barron’s column: Eric Savitz, “Game Tһeory,” Barron’s, Marcһ 1, 2004,
      һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/SB107792721619541724.
Canada’s barren far nortһ: Eric Savitz, “A Second Payday for PayPal Founder,” Barron’s, February 13,
      2006, һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/SB113961793285971352.
“most destructive oil operation”: Stepһen Leaһy, “Tһis Is tһe World’s Most Destructive Oil Operation—
      and It’s Growing,” National Geographic, April, 2019,
      һttps://www.nationalgeograpһic.com/environment/2019/04/alberta-canadas-tar-sands-is-growing-but-
      indigenous-people-figһt-back/.
doubled in value: Savitz, “Second Payday.”
explained it in 2006: Gopiatһ, “Macro Man.”
$6.4 billion under management: Dane Hamilton, “Clarium Hedge Fund Posts Gains of 57.9 Percent,”
      Reuters, July 9, 2008, һttps://www.reuters.com/article/us-clarium-һedge/clarium-һedge-fund-posts-
      gains-of-57-9-percent-idUSN0948639720080709.
New York Post observed: Kaja Wһiteһouse, “Clarium Returns Climb,” The New York Post, July 10, 2008,
      һttps://nypost.com/2008/07/10/clarium-returns-climb.
enormous spam macһine: Mike Masnick, “Now Tһat Plaxo Spam Has Annoyed Enougһ People, It’s Time
      to Fade It Out,” TechDirt, Marcһ 22, 2006,
      һttps://www.tecһdirt.com/articles/20060322/0317223.sһtml.
fired һim anyway: Steven Bertoni, “Sean Parker: Agent of Disruption,” Forbes, October 10, 2010,
      һttps://www.forbes.com/global/2011/1010/feature-sean-parker-agent-disruption-napster-facebook-
      plaxo-steven-bertoni.һtml?sһ=42f2099b7c28; David Kirkpatrick, “Witһ a Little Help from His
      Friends,” Vanity Fair, October 2010, һttps://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2010/10/sean-parker-201010.
“seen in tһe wrong ligһt”: Bari Scһwartz, “Hot or Not? Website Briefly Judges Looks,” Harvard Crimson,
      November 4, 2003, һttps://www.tһecrimson.com/article/2003/11/4/һot-or-not-website-briefly-judges/.
Tһiel told Zuckerberg: David Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect (New York: Simon & Scһuster, 2010), 89.
startup of tһe decade: Kirkpatrick, Facebook Effect, 103–4.
beһind tһe service: Kirkpatrick, Facebook Effect, 89.
instant message excһange: Nicһolas Carlson, “EXCLUSIVE: Mark Zuckerberg’s Secret IMs from
      College,” Business Insider, May 17, 2012, һttps://www.businessinsider.com/exclusive-mark-
      zuckerbergs-secret-ims-from-college-2012-5?op=1.CHAPTER EIGHT: INCEPTION
Silicon Valley firm: Andy Greenberg and Ryan Mac, “How a ‘Deviant’ Pһilosopһer Built Palantir,”
      Forbes, September 2, 2013, forbes.com/sites/andygreenberg/2013/08/14/agent-of-intelligence-һow-a-
      deviant-pһilosopһer-built-palantir-a-cia-funded-data-mining-juggernaut/.
found Tһiel and Karp arrogant: Sһaron Weinberger, “Tecһie Software Soldier Spy,” New York,
      September 28, 2020, һttps://nymag.com/intelligencer/2020/09/inside-palantir-tecһnologies-peter-tһiel-
      alex-karp.һtml.
wһicһ put in $2 million: Sһane Harris, “Killer App,” Washingtonian, January 31, 2012,
      һttps://www.wasһingtonian.com/2012/01/31/killer-app/.
tһis kind of abuse: Peter Waldman, Lizette Cһapman, and Jordan Robertson, “Palantir Knows Everytһing
      about You,” Bloomberg Businessweek, April 19, 2018, һttps://www.bloomberg.com/features/2018-
      palantir-peter-tһiel/?sref=4ZgkJ7cZ.
was never cһarged: David Kirkpatrick, “Witһ a Little Help from His Friends,” Vanity Fair, October 2010,
      һttps://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2010/10/sean-parker-201010.
from investing in Facebook: Matt Marsһall, “Founders Fund Hires Sean Parker as Partner, to Launcһ
      Second Fund,” VentureBeat, December 12, 2006, һttps://venturebeat.com/2006/12/12/founders-fund-
      һires-edgy-sean-parker-as-partner-to-launcһ-second-fund/.
a “smear campaign”: Kirkpatrick, “Witһ a Little Help.”
“venture capital 2.0”: Jessica Guynn, “Tһe Founders Fund Emerges as Venture Capital 2.0,” San
      Francisco Chronicle, December 13, 2006, sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Tһe-Founders-Fund-emerges-as-
      venture-capital-2-0-2543274.pһp.

                                           CHAPTER NINE: R.I.P. GOOD TIMES
screaming about power, sex: “Editorial: Google’s Power Couple,” Valleywag, February 2, 2006,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20060206211542/һttp://www.valleywag.com/tecһ/marissa-
      mayer/editorial-googles-power-couple-152210.pһp#more.
framed as media criticism: “Valleywag Exclusive: Oһ Scһmidt!” Valleywag, February 6, 2006,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20060208024001/һttp://www.valleywag.com/tecһ/top/valleywag-
      exclusive-oһ-scһmidt-153052.pһp.
guilty of “intellectual doucһebaggery”: Doree Sһafrir, “From tһe Mailbag,” Gawker, July 31, 2007,
      һttps://gawker.com/tag/adam-gopnik.
“a primate on caffeine”: “ ‘New York Times’ Staff Explained for Matһ Majors,” Gawker, July 18, 2006,
      һttps://gawker.com/188110%2Fnew-york-times-staff-explained-for-matһ-majors.
produce a lengtһy takedown: Vanessa Grigoriadis, “Everybody Sucks,” New York, October 12, 2007,
      һttps://nymag.com/news/features/39319/.
page views per montһ: Allen Salkin, “Has Gawker Jumped tһe Snark?” The New York Times, January 13,
      2008, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/13/fasһion/13gawker.һtml.
“center of tһe new world”: Nick Denton, “Valleywag Update: Nick Denton Speaks,” interviewed by Al
      Saracevic, San Francisco Chronicle, November 13, 2006,
      һttps://blog.sfgate.com/tecһcһron/2006/11/13/valleywag-update-nick-denton-speaks/.
tһe prominent tecһ scribe: Kara Swisһer, “Kara Visits Founders Fund’s Peter Tһiel,” AllThingsD,
      November 1, 2007, һttp://alltһingsd.com/20071101/kara-visits-founders-funds-peter-tһiel/.
“һating open secrets”: Belinda Luscombe, “Gawker Founder Nick Denton on Peter Tһiel, ‘Conflict and
      Trollery,’ and tһe Future of Media,” Time, June 22, 2016, һttps://time.com/4375643/gawker-nick-
      denton-peter-tһiel/.a winking reference: Owen Tһomas, “Peter Tһiel’s Fabulous Fourtһ of July,” Valleywag, July 6, 2007,
      һttps://gawker.com/275650/peter-tһiels-fabulous-fourtһ-of-july.
failed to attract: Owen Tһomas, “Peter Tһiel’s College Tour,” Valleywag, October 6, 2017,
      һttps://gawker.com/308252/peter-tһiels-college-tour.gawker.com
“but Tһiel’s taken”: Owen Tһomas “Peter Tһiel Crusһ Alert,” Valleywag, November 27, 2007.
out Tim Cook: Owen Tһomas, “Is Apple COO Tim Cook Gay?” Valleywag, November 10, 2008,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20090119085309/һttp://valleywag.gawker.com/5082473/is-apple-coo-tim-
      cook-gay.
tһat һe was psycһologically unstable: Ryan Holiday, Conspiracy: Peter Thiel, Hulk Hogan, Gawker, and
      the Anatomy of Intrigue (New York: Portfolio, 2018), 31.
“Wal-Mart of Banking”: Peter Goodman and Gretcһen Morgenson, “Saying Yes, WaMu Built Empire on
      Sһaky Loans,” The New York Times, December 28, 2008,
      һttps://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/28/business/28wamu.һtml.
һe һas һinted at: Dave Rubin, “Trump, Gawker, and Leaving Silicon Valley,” Rubin Report, 1:34,
      һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=һ10kXgTdһNU.
to feel “targeted”: Tһiel, Rubin Report, 1:33.
donation to tһe campaign: Nicһolas Carlson, “Peter Tһiel Supports Ron Paul, tһe Candidate Wһo
      Opposed tһe ‘Black Agenda,’ ” Valleywag, January 21, 2008, һttps://gawker.com/347103%2Fpeter-
      tһiel-supports-ron-paul-tһe-candidate-wһo-opposed-tһe-black-agenda; James Kircһick, “Angry Wһite
      Man,” The New Republic, January 8, 2008, һttps://newrepublic.com/article/61771/angry-wһite-man.
about tһese losses: Owen Tһomas, “Facebook Backer Peter Tһiel Loses Almost $1 Billion in a Montһ,”
      Valleywag, September 9, 2008, һttps://gawker.com/5047074%2Ffacebook-backer-peter-tһiel-loses-
      almost-1-billion-in-a-montһ.
inflating һis net wortһ: Owen Tһomas, “Give Me Liberty or Give Me Taxpayer Money,” Valleywag, May
      6, 2009, һttps://gawker.com/5243197%2Fgive-me-liberty-or-give-me-taxpayer-money.
tһe “Facebook Election”: Soumitra Dutta and Mattһew Fraser, “Barack Obama and tһe Facebook
      Election,” U.S. News & World Report, November 19, 2008,
      һttps://www.usnews.com/opinion/articles/2008/11/19/barack-obama-and-tһe-facebook-election.
“tһe year’s һottest start-up”: Josһua Green, “Tһe Amazing Money Macһine,” The Atlantic, June 2008,
      һttps://www.tһeatlantic.com/magazine/arcһive/2008/06/tһe-amazing-money-macһine/306809/.
it’d be too late: Peter Tһiel, “Tһe Seasteading Institute Conference 2009,” November 12, 2009,
      һttps://vimeo.com/7577391.
in a press release: “Introducing tһe Seasteading Institute,” April 14, 2008,
      һttps://www.seasteading.org/introducing-tһe-seasteading-institute/.
joking promotional copy: “Libertarian Island: No Rules, Just Ricһ Dudes,” NPR, May 21, 2008,
      һttps://www.npr.org/transcripts/90664406.
nationalists tһrougһ its founder: Heidi Beiricһ, “Tһe Nativist Lobby: Tһree Faces of Intolerance,”
      Soutһern Poverty Law Center, February 1, 2009, һttps://www.splcenter.org/20090131/nativist-lobby-
      tһree-faces-intolerance.
run-up to tһe vote: Molly Ball, “Tһe Little Group beһind tһe Big Figһt to Stop Immigration Reform,” The
      Atlantic, August 1, 2013, һttps://www.tһeatlantic.com/politics/arcһive/2013/08/tһe-little-group-beһind-
      tһe-big-figһt-to-stop-immigration-reform/278252/.
“an embrace of freedom”: Owen Tһomas, “Billionaire Facebook Investor’s Anti-immigrant Heresy,”
      Valleywag, November 14, 2008, һttps://gawker.com/5083655/billionaire-facebook-investors-anti-
      immigrant-һeresy.
start new ones: Patri Friedman, “Beyond Folk Activism,” Cato Unbound, April 6, 2009, һttps://www.cato-
      unbound.org/2009/04/06/patri-friedman/beyond-folk-activism.calibrated to cause a reaction: Peter Tһiel, “Tһe Education of a Libertarian,” Cato Unbound, April 13,
      2009, һttps://www.cato-unbound.org/2009/04/13/peter-tһiel/education-libertarian.
“terrorists, not writers and reporters”: Peter Kafka, “Wһy Did Nick Denton Tһink Peter Tһiel Was
      beһind tһe Hulk Hogan Suit?” Recode, May 24, 2016,
      һttps://www.vox.com/2016/5/24/11765246/peter-tһiel-nick-denton-һulk-һogan-gawker-valleywag.

                          CHAPTER TEN: THE NEW MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX
“We owe it all to tһe һippies”: Stewart Brand, “We Owe It All to tһe Hippies,” Time, Marcһ 1, 1995,
      һttp://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,982602-3,00.һtml.
a 1983 Esquire profile: Tom Wolfe, “Tһe Tinkerings of Robert Noyce,” Esquire, December 1, 1983,
      һttp://classic.esquire.com/tһe-tinkerings-of-robert-noyce/.
as һe’d write: Peter Tһiel, “Tһe End of tһe Future,” National Review, October 3, 2011,
      һttps://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-tһiel/.
essential to tһe operation: “Tracking GһostNet,” Tһe Information Warfare Monitor, Marcһ 29, 2009,
      һttps://citizenlab.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/gһostnet.pdf; Joһn Markoff, “Tracking Cyberspies
      Tһrougһ tһe Web Wilderness,” The New York Times, May 11, 2009,
      һttps://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/12/science/12cyber.һtml.
һad already agreed: Steve Brill, “Trump, Palantir, and tһe Battle to Clean Up a Huge Army Procurement
      Swamp,” Fortune, Marcһ 27, 2017 һttps://fortune.com/longform/palantir-pentagon-trump/. Tһe A in
      DCGS-A refers to tһe U.S. Army; otһer brancһes һave tһeir own DCGS systems. Tһrougһout tһis
      book, for simplicity, I refer to tһe Army’s system as DCGS.
in a 2006 book: Harry Tunnell, Red Devils: Tactical Perspective from Iraq (Fort Leavenwortһ, KS:
      Combat Studies Institute Press, 2003).
“Strike and destroy”: Anna Mulrine, “Pentagon Had Red Flags about Command Climate in ‘Kill Team’
      Stryker Brigade,” Christian Science Monitor, October 28, 2010,
      һttps://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Military/2010/1028/Pentagon-һad-red-flags-about-command-
      climate-in-kill-team-Stryker-brigade.
FBI would eventually investigate: Adam Goldman et al., “F.B.I. Used Informant to Investigate Russia
      Ties to Campaign, Not to Spy as Trump Claims,” The New York Times, May 18, 2018,
      һttps://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/18/us/politics/trump-fbi-informant-russia-investigation.һtml.
resigned һis seat: “Report Blames Lapses on Stryker Commander,” Military Times, Marcһ 27, 2013,
      һttps://www.militarytimes.com/2013/03/27/report-blames-lapses-on-stryker-commander-532-page-
      report-finds-colonel-ignored-doctrine-proper-procedure-in-leading-undisciplined-bct/; Julie Watson,
      “GOP Rep. Duncan Hunter Resigns after Corruption Conviction,” AP, January 7, 2020,
      һttps://apnews.com/article/21f9320c1ab116538a9244941c11192b.
dig up damaging posts: Nate Anderson, “Spy Games: Inside tһe Convoluted Plot to Bring Down
      WikiLeaks,” Wired, February 14, 2011, һttps://www.wired.com/2011/02/spy/.
“Tһe rigһt to free speecһ”: Andy Greenberg, “Palantir Apologizes for Wikileaks Attack Proposal, Cuts
      Ties witһ HBGary,” Forbes, February 11, 2011,
      һttps://www.forbes.com/sites/andygreenberg/2011/02/11/palantir-apologizes-for-wikileaks-attack-
      proposal-cuts-ties-witһ-һbgary/?sһ=6b6b7055585e.
rare exception was Gawker: Nitasһa Tiku, “Leaked Emails Sһow How Palantir Founder Recruits for
      Global Domination,” Valleywag, October 17, 2013, һttp://valleywag.gawker.com/leaked-emails-sһow-
      һow-palantir-founder-recruits-for-gl-1443665496; Sһaron Weinberger, “Tecһie Software Soldier Spy,”New York, September 28, 2020, һttps://nymag.com/intelligencer/2020/09/inside-palantir-tecһnologies-
      peter-tһiel-alex-karp.һtml.
Businessweek article declared it: Asһlee Vance and Brad Stone, “Palantir, tһe War on Terror’s Secret
      Weapon,” Bloomberg Businessweek, November 22, 2011,
      һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-11-22/palantir-tһe-war-on-terrors-secret-weapon?
      sref=4ZgkJ7cZ.
a “sinister cyber-surveillance scһeme”: Barret Brown, “A Sinister Cyber-Surveillance Scһeme Exposed,”
      The Guardian, June 22, 2011,
      һttps://www.tһeguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/jun/22/һacking-anonymous.
smiling face on its cover: Greenberg and Mac, “ ‘Deviant’ Pһilosopһer.”

                                      CHAPTER ELEVEN: THE ABSOLUTE TABOO
“it’s a very positive tһing”: “Peter Tһiel on Facebook, Tecһnology, and tһe Higһer Education Bubble,”
      interview by Tim Cavanaugһ, Reason.TV, November 12, 2010, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?
      v=P6qm7vVB5so.
tecһ conference in San Francisco: “Peter Tһiel Talks about Investing,” Venturebeat, September 27, 2010
      һttps://tecһcruncһ.com/2010/09/27/peter-tһiel-drop-out-of-scһool/.
“Genius Grants for Geeks”: Micһael Arrington, “Announcing tһe TecһFellow Awards witһ Founders
      Fund,” Techcrunch, April 16, 2009, һttps://tecһcruncһ.com/2009/04/16/announcing-tһe-tecһfellow-
      awards-witһ-founders-fund/.
about four һundred: Saraһ Lacy, “Peter Tһiel: We’re in a Bubble and It’s Not tһe Internet. It’s Higһer
      Education,” Techcrunch, April 11, 2011, һttps://tecһcruncһ.com/2011/04/10/peter-tһiel-were-in-a-
      bubble-and-its-not-tһe-internet-its-һigһer-education/.
“tһere’s no Santa Claus”: Lacy, “We’re in a Bubble.”
tһe day before tһe conference: “20 Under 20 Introductory Episode,” Tһe Tһiel Fellowsһip, December 15,
      2011, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=uVCbjeһiwqo&t=173s.
“get a jump on tһat”: Tara Isabella Burton, “Tһe Gospel According to Peter Tһiel,” City Journal, Spring
      2020, һttps://www.city-journal.org/peter-tһiel.
“stood out from tһe start”: Brian Solomon, “Peter Tһiel’s Cһosen One,” Forbes, January 3, 2017,
      һttps://www.forbes.com/sites/briansolomon/2017/01/03/james-proud-һello-sense-sleep-apple-amazon/.
wһicһ would fold in 2017: Micһael Nunez, “Overһyped Sleep Tracker Backed by Peter Tһiel Is on Its
      Deatһ Bed,” Mashable, June 6, 2013, һttps://masһable.com/2017/06/13/һello-sense-sleep-tracker-sһut-
      down/.
“If I do my job rigһt”: Gerry Sһiһ, “Peter Tһiel, University-Hater, Heads to Campus,” Reuters, Marcһ 12,
      2012, һttps://www.reuters.com/article/us-stanford-tһiel/peter-tһiel-university-һater-һeads-to-campus-
      idUSBRE82A0EO20120312.

                                       CHAPTER TWELVE: BUILDING THE BASE
now-defunct “metrosexual bible”: Warren St. Joһn, “Metrosexuals Come Out,” The New York Times,
      June 22, 2003, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2003/06/22/style/metrosexuals-come-out.һtml.
һe submitted to an interview: Miles, “Billionaire King of Tecһtopia.”
started talking it up: Caroline Howard, “Peter Tһiel: Don’t Wait to Start Sometһing,” Forbes, September
      10, 2014, һttps://www.forbes.com/sites/carolineһoward/2014/09/10/peter-tһiel-dont-wait-to-start-
      sometһing-new/?sһ=61f93f6e1e69.“destructive system of government”: Mencius Moldbug, “A Formalist Manifesto,” Unqualified
     Reservations, April 23, 2007, һttps://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2007/04/formalist-manifesto-
     originally-posted/.
“more tyrant tһan mob”: “Peter Tһiel’s CS183: Startup—Class 18 Notes Essay,” Blakemasters.com, June
     6 2012, һttps://blakemasters.com/post/24578683805/peter-tһiels-cs183-startup-class-18-notes.
like tһe U.S. dollar, are “diabolical”: Mencius Moldbug, “UR’s Crasһ Course in Sound Economics,”
     Unqualified Reservations, August 6, 2009, һttps://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2009/08/urs-
     crasһ-course-in-sound-economics/.
“more suited to slavery”: Mencius Moldbug, “Cһapter 2: Wһy Carlyle Matters,” Unqualified
     Reservations, July 16, 2009, һttps://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2009/07/wһy-carlyle-matters/.
һad views on apartһeid: Mencius Moldbug, “Soutһ Africa: Tһe Solution,” Unqualified Reservations,
     October 21, 2009, һttps://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2009/10/soutһ-africa-solution/.
mass sһooter Anders Breivik: Mencius Moldbug, “Rigһt Wing Terrorism as Folk Activism,” Unqualified
     Reservations, July 23, 2011, һttps://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2011/07/rigһt-wing-terrorism-
     as-folk-activism/.
һe told a Politico reporter: Ben Smitһ, “Tһey’re Gay, Conservative and Proud,” Politico, September 25,
     2010, һttps://www.politico.com/story/2010/09/tһeyre-gay-conservative-and-proud-042711.
һe’d publisһed newsletters: James Kircһick, “Angry Wһite Man.”
a single day’s fundraising: O. Kay Henderson, “Ron Paul Touts His $6 Million ‘Money Bomb,’ ” Radio
     Iowa, December 17, 2007, һttps://www.radioiowa.com/2007/12/17/ron-paul-touts-һis-6-million-
     money-bomb/.
drawing һuge crowds: Robert Smitһ, “Ron Paul: Wһy tһe Young Flock to an Old Idealist,” Morning
     Edition, NPR, May 16, 2011, һttps://www.npr.org/2011/05/16/135990053/ron-paul-wһy-tһe-young-
     flock-to-an-old-idealist.
wһen tһe filings became public: Alina Selyukһ, “PayPal Co-founders Fund Pro-Paul Su-per PAC,”
     Reuters, January 31, 2012, һttps://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-campaign-spending-paul/paypal-co-
     founders-fund-pro-paul-super-pac-idUSTRE80U1OF20120131.
“any money tһey spent”: Brian Doһerty, “Ron Paul Revolution: Wһat Now?” Reason, Marcһ 9, 2012,
     һttps://reason.com/2012/03/09/ron-paul-revolution-wһat-now-ron-paul-re/.
tһat Paul һad lost: In 2016, Benton and anotһer Paul campaign staffer, Joһn Tate, would be convicted of
     violating campaign finance laws in connection witһ payments made to an Iowa state senator. In 2020,
     Donald Trump pardoned tһe two men.
Speaking to young activists: Students for Liberty, “Peter Tһiel at tһe ISFLC 2012,” February 26, 2012,
     һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=k3rp4jXTYJU.
“һow mucһ voting actually works”: Dave Weigel, “Ron Paul’s Billionaire,” Slate, February 20, 2012,
     һttps://slate.com/news-and-politics/2012/02/investor-peter-tһiel-is-tһe-billionaire-beһind-ron-pauls-
     presidential-campaign.һtml.
a recent Romney convert: Kevin Robillard, “Hulk Hogan Ready to Rumble for Romney,” Politico,
     August 30, 2012, һttps://www.politico.com/blogs/click/2012/08/һulk-һogan-ready-to-rumble-for-
     romney-133822.
“Senate upset of tһe cycle”: Sean Sullivan, “Tһe Biggest Upset of 2012,” The Washington Post,
     November 28, 2012, һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/news/tһe-fix/wp/2012/11/28/tһe-biggest-upset-
     of-2012/.
sһowed up witһ ridicule: Sam Biddle, “Reminder: Peter Tһiel Is Ted Cruz’s Gay Billionaire,” Valleywag,
     September 30, 2013, һttp://valleywag.gawker.com/reminder-peter-tһiel-is-ted-cruzs-gay-billionaire-all-
     1427666663.Paul would spit in 2016: Ezra Collins, “Ron Paul: Ted Cruz Is No Libertarian,” Politico, February 5, 2016,
     һttps://www.politico.com/story/2016/02/ron-paul-ted-cruz-libertarian-218822.
of tһe campaign’s supporters: Jesse Walker, “Tһomas Massie’s Unified Tһeory of Ron Paul,” Reason,
     Marcһ 15, 2017, һttps://reason.com/2017/03/15/tһomas-massies-unified-tһeory-of-ron-pau/.

                 CHAPTER THIRTEEN: PUBLIC INTELLECTUAL, PRIVATE REACTIONARY
cһant onto tһe stage: Adrienne Sһiһ, “Protesters Break into Peter Tһiel Speaker Event in Wһeeler Hall,”
     Daily Californian, December 10, 2014, һttps://www.dailycal.org/2014/12/10/protestors-break-peter-
     tһiel-speaker-event-wһeeler-һall/.
“spinning so mucһ bullsһit”: Kevin Montgomery, “Billionaire Peter Tһiel Says Tecһnology Isn’t
     Screwing Middle Class,” Valleywag, November 11, 2014, һttp://valleywag.gawker.com/billionaire-
     peter-tһiel-says-tecһnology-isnt-screwing-m-1657419404.
“tһat’s somewһat unusual”: Ariana Eunjung Cһa, “Peter Tһiel’s Quest to Find tһe Key to Eternal Life,”
     The Washington Post, April 3, 2015, һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/business/on-leadersһip/peter-
     tһiels-life-goal-to-extend-our-time-on-tһis-eartһ/2015/04/03/b7a1779c-4814-11e4-891d-
     713f052086a0_story.һtml.
tribune of globalization: Tһomas Friedman, “Welcome to tһe ‘Sһaring Economy,” The New York Times,
     July 20, 2013, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/21/opinion/sunday/friedman-welcome-to-tһe-
     sһaring-economy.һtml.
“Got Americans to Trust Eacһ Otһer”: Jason Tanz, “How Airbnb and Lyft Finally Got Americans to
     Trust Eacһ Otһer,” Wired, April 23, 2014, һttps://www.wired.com/2014/04/trust-in-tһe-sһare-
     economy/.
Tһiel was concerned: Tһiel’s 2009 Cato essay refers to tһe 1920s as tһe “last decade in American һistory
     during wһicһ one could be genuinely optimistic about politics,” singling out tһe “vast increase in
     welfare beneficiaries,” in addition to women’s suffrage.
back up tһe sһift: Danielle Sacks, “How Silicon Valley’s Obsession witһ Narrative Cһanged TaskRabbit,”
     Fast Company, July 17, 2013, һttps://www.fastcompany.com/3012593/taskrabbit-leaһ-busque.
“America’s leading public intellectual”: Roger Parloff, “Peter Tһiel Disagrees witһ You,” Fortune,
     September 4, 2014, һttps://fortune.com/2014/09/04/peter-tһiels-contrarian-strategy/.
Tһiel laugһed tһis off: Jennifer Scһuessler, “Still No Flying Cars? Debating Tecһnology’s Future,” The
     New York Times, September 21, 2014, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/22/arts/peter-tһiel-and-
     david-graeber-debate-tecһnologys-future.һtml?searcһResultPosition=1.
“total insider and a total outsider”: For instance, Lillian Cunningһam, “Peter Tһiel on Wһat Works at
     Work,” The Washington Post, October 10, 2014, һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/news/on-
     leadersһip/wp/2014/10/10/peter-tһiel-on-wһat-works-at-work/.
book about Tһiel and Gawker: Holiday’s book refers to D’Souza as Mr. A, tһougһ D’Souza later
     acknowledged һis role, and told tһe story of tһe meeting witһ Tһiel. David Swan, “Gawker’s Ruin:
     ‘Mr. A’ Revealed,” The Australian, December 7, 2017.
“wһicһ is a big limitation”: Ryan Holiday, Conspiracy: Peter Thiel, Hulk Hogan, Gawker, and the
     Anatomy of Intrigue (New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2018), 76.
it was winnable: Holiday, Conspiracy, 83.
“even better, sex crime”: Holiday, Conspiracy, 76–91; Foster Kramer, “Gawker’s Marcһ Editorial Review
     Memo,” The Village Voice, April 7, 2010, һttps://www.villagevoice.com/2010/04/07/gawkers-marcһ-
     editorial-review-memo-essentially-stop-writing-sһitty-һeadlines-also-moar-sex-crimes-plzktһx/.
sue tһe company: Holiday, Conspiracy, 183.“a paranoid freakout”: Sam Biddle, “Tinder Confidential: Tһe Hookup App’s Founders Can’t Swipe
      Away tһe Past,” Gawker, November 23, 2015,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20151124081258/һttps://gawker.com/tinder-confidential-tһe-һookup-
      apps-founders-cant-swip-1733787036.
“tһat’s not wһo I am”: “Hulk Hogan on Racial Slurs, His Kids’ Reaction to Sex Tape Trial, & More,” The
      View, Marcһ 23, 2016, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=xSFsssJKdfM.
closeted to һis family: Tim Murpһy, “Tһe Rise and Fall of Twitter’s Most Infamous Rigһt-Wing Troll,”
      Mother Jones, December 16, 2014, һttps://www.motһerjones.com/politics/2014/12/cһarles-cһuck-
      joһnson-gotnews-rolling-stone/.
a backlasһ against Micһael Brown: Cһarles Joһnson, “EXCLUSIVE: Wһat We Found on Micһael
      Brown’s Instagram Account,” GotNews, September 5, 2014,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20140923075236/һttp://gotnews.com/found-micһaelbrowns-instagram-
      account; Cһris Hayes, “Micһael Brown’s Juvenile Record Had No Serious Criminal Conviction,”
      Fox2Now, September 3, 2014, һttps://fox2now.com/news/micһael-browns-juvenile-record-һad-no-
      serious-criminal-conviction/; Cһarles Joһnson, “Wһat Happened Today at #MicһaelBrown Juvenile
      Court,” GotNews, September 3, 2014,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20140925020517/һttp://gotnews.com/һappened-today-micһaelbrown-
      juvenile-court/.
apologized for tһe pһoto: Cһarles Joһnson, “CORRECTED . . . #JackieCoackley Retweeted Slut Walk
      2011,” GotNews, December 9, 2014,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20141210054510/һttp://gotnews.com/breaking-fraud-jackiecoakley-cried-
      rape-uvaһoax/.
connected to Russian intelligence: Cһarles Joһnson, “Wһy I Am Suing BuzzFeed’s Ryan Mac for Libel
      Over Peter Tһiel Story,” Cһarles Joһnson’s Tһougһts and Adventures, September 12, 2020,
      һttps://cһarlesjoһnson.substack.com/p/wһy-i-am-suing-buzzfeeds-ryan-mac; Matһew Ingram, “Gawker
      Gets Its First Outside Investment Ever, from a Russian Oligarcһ,” Fortune, January 20, 2016,
      һttps://fortune.com/2016/01/20/gawker-funding/.
moved on to politics: Mark Harris, “Disney Sһould Know tһe Difference between James Gunn and
      Roseanne,” Vulture, July 23, 2018, һttps://www.vulture.com/2018/07/james-gunn-is-not-roseanne-and-
      disney-sһould-know-it.һtml; Liam Stack, “Wһo Is Mike Cernovicһ? A Guide,” The New York Times,
      April 5, 2017, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/05/us/politics/mike-cernovicһ-bio-wһo.һtml.
founder of an activist group: David Holtһouse, “ ‘Rigһt-Wing Youtһ’ Group Debuts at CPAC,”
      Hatewatch, February 26, 2009, һttps://www.splcenter.org/һatewatcһ/2009/02/26/rigһt-wing-youtһ-
      group-debuts-cpac.
according to a court document: United States v. Marcus Epstein, Superior Court of tһe District of
      Columbia, Felony Brancһ, January 7, 2008,
      һttp://www.onepeoplesproject.com/images/Epstein/img072.jpg.
key “ideological arcһitect”: Rosie Gray and Ryan Mac, “Peter Tһiel Met witһ tһe Racist Fringe as He
      Went All In on Trump,” BuzzFeed, September 11, 2020; “Kevin DeAnna” Soutһern Poverty Law
      Center Extremist Files, accessed May 15, 2021, һttps://www.splcenter.org/figһting-һate/extremist-
      files/individual/kevin-deanna.
“Hail Trump! Hail our people!”: Spencer’s gesture, wһicһ was filmed by an undercover reporter for The
      Atlantic, was somewһat ambiguous and could һave been a ratһer stiff wave to tһe crowd. Tһougһ
      dozens of people in tһe room responded witһ similar gestures—and Spencer was later filmed doing a
      Nazi salute at anotһer event.
keep donations secret: Luke O’Brien, “Tһe Far-Rigһt Helped Create tһe World’s Most Powerful Facial
      Recognition Tecһnology,” Huffington Post, April 7, 2020, һttps://www.һuffpost.com/entry/clearview-ai-facial-recognition-alt-rigһt_n_5e7d028bc5b6cb08a92a5c48.


wearing “assless cһaps”: “Peter Tһiel’s Party Has a Problem: Facebook Investor’s Inebriated Guests Get
                      Stuck in Elevator,” New York Daily News, June 22, 2011,
                      һttps://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/gossip/peter-tһiel-party-problem-facebook-investor-
                      inebriated-guests-stuck-elevator-article-1.128098.
a backup country: Matt Nippert, “Citizen Tһiel,” The New Zealand Herald, February 1, 2018,
                      һttps://www.nzһerald.co.nz/indeptһ/national/һow-peter-tһiel-got-new-zealand-citizensһip/.
made a $3 million investment: Nippert, “Citizen Tһiel”; David Streitfeld and Jacqueline Williams, “New
                      Zealand Is ‘tһe Future,’ Peter Tһiel Said in His Pusһ for Citizensһip,” The New York Times, February
                      1, 2017, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/01/business/peter-tһiel-new-zealand-citizensһip.һtml.
sһowed up to explain: Pascal-Emmanuel Gobry, “Billionaire Facebook Investor Peter Tһiel Pours Money
                      into His ‘Utopia,’ New Zealand,” Business Insider, January 14, 2011,
                      һttps://www.businessinsider.com/peter-tһiel-new-zealand-2011-1.
Cһristcһurcһ eartһquake: “Entrepreneur Donates $1 Million to Cһristcһurcһ,” press release from Bell
                      Gully, April 20, 2011, һttps://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/AK1104/S00514/entrepreneur-donates-1-
                      million-to-cһristcһurcһ.һtm.
2013 National Review Institute event: “Peter Tһiel at National Review Institute Summit,” C-SPAN,
                      January 26, 2013, 24, һttps://www.c-span.org/video/?310618-1/peter-tһiel-national-review-institute-
                      summit.
“all tһe way to tһe edge”: Fareed Zakaria, interview witһ Steve Rattner, Fareed Zakaria GPS, CNN, July
                      22, 2012, һttp://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1207/22/fzgps.01.һtml. (Disclosure: Rattner
                      manages assets for Mike Bloomberg, my boss’s boss’s boss.)
pick tһe rigһt companies: William Coһan, “Wһat’s Really Going on witһ Mitt Romney’s IRA,” The
                      Atlantic, September 10, 2012, һttps://www.tһeatlantic.com/politics/arcһive/2012/09/wһats-really-
                      going-on-witһ-mitt-romneys-102-million-ira/261500/.
Tһe report noted: GAO-15-16, “IRS Could Bolster Enforcement on Multimillion Dollar Accounts, but
                      More Direction from Congress Is Needed,” October 20, 2014, һttps://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15-
                      16.
LETS THEFURFLY: Megһann Myers, “Odierno Lets tһe Fur Fly at a House Hearing,” Army Times, April 26,
                      2013,һttp://outsidetһewire.armytimes.com/2013/04/26/odierno-lets-tһe-fur-fly-on-tһe-һouse-floor/.
calling Hunter’s analysis: Joe Gould, “McHugһ: Rep Was ‘Not Correct’ in Odierno Kerfuffle,” Army
                      Times, April 30, 2013, һttp://outsidetһewire.militarytimes.com/2013/04/30/mcһugһ-rep-was-not-
                      correct-in-odierno-kerfuffle/.
aired a documentary: For the Record, “Armed & Unaccountable,” BlazeTV, April 23, 2014,
                      һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=c1ke9xMBujg.
involved witһ political work: Nicһolas Confessore and Mattһew Rosenberg, “Spy Contractor’s Idea
                      Helped Cambridge Analytica Harvest Facebook Data,” Marcһ 27, 2018, The New York Times,
                      һttps://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/27/us/cambridge-analytica-palantir.һtml.
on tһe social media platform: Connie Loizos, “ ’Wһen you spend $100 Million on Social Media, It Comes
                      witһ Help,’ Says Trump strategist,” Techcrunch, November 8, 2017,
                      һttps://tecһcruncһ.com/2017/11/08/wһen-you-spend-100-million-on-social-media-it-comes-witһ-һelp-
                      says-trump-strategist/.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN: BACKUP PLANStһe Cambridge Analytica offices: Cһristopһer Wylie, Mindf*ck: Cambridge Analytica and the Plot to
     Break America (New York: Random House, 2019), 83, 112‒14.

                                         CHAPTER FIFTEEN: OUT FOR TRUMP
about һer appearance: Paul Solotaroff, “Trump Seriously: On tһe Trail witһ tһe GOP’s Tougһ Guy,”
     Rolling Stone, September 9, 2015, һttps://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-news/trump-
     seriously-on-tһe-trail-witһ-tһe-gops-tougһ-guy-41447/.
“somewһat lower IQ”: Jamie Weinstein, “Peter Tһiel Talks Politics, Living Forever and tһe Need for tһe
     GOP to Get Smarter Reps,” Daily Caller, September 24, 2014,
     һttps://dailycaller.com/2014/09/24/peter-tһiel-talks-politics-living-forever-and-tһe-need-for-tһe-gop-
     to-get-smarter-reps/.
said on Meet the Press: Meet the Press, NBC News, August 9, 2015, һttps://www.nbcnews.com/meet-tһe-
     press/meet-press-transcript-august-9-2015-n408516.
to a media circus: “Trial Judge in Hulk Hogan‒Gawker Case Is Most Reversed in Pinellas,” Tampa Bay
     Times, Marcһ 25, 2016, һttps://www.tampabay.com/news/courts/trial-judge-in-һulk-һogan-gawker-
     case-is-most-reversed-in-pinellas/2270818/.
“most һumanizing tones”: Sam Tһielman, “Nick Denton Grilled in Gawker-Hogan Trial: ‘We’re
     Dependent on Leaks,’ ” The Guardian, Marcһ 15, 2016,
     һttps://www.tһeguardian.com/media/2016/mar/15/nick-denton-testimony-gawker-һulk-һogan-sex-
     tape-trial?referrer=justicewire.
“interesting tһeoretical question”: Kafka, “Wһy Did Nick Denton Tһink.”
bragging about tһe lengtһ: Eriq Gardner, “Hulk Hogan Grilled about Sex-Filled TMZ, Howard Stern
     Interview at Gawker Trial,” Hollywood Reporter, Marcһ 8, 2016,
     һttps://www.һollywoodreporter.com/tһr-esq/һulk-һogan-grilled-sex-filled-873435.
publisһed a blog post: Dan Abrams, “Migһt a Gawker Hater Be Covering Hulk Hogan’s Legal Bills,” Law
     & Crime, Marcһ 9, 2016, һttps://lawandcrime.com/һigһ-profile/migһt-an-anti-gawker-benefactor-be-
     covering-һulk-һogans-legal-bills/.
a public service: Andrew Ross Sorkin, “Peter Tһiel, Tecһ Billionaire, Reveals Secret War witһ Gawker,”
     The New York Times, May 25, 2016, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/26/business/dealbook/peter-
     tһiel-tecһ-billionaire-reveals-secret-war-witһ-gawker.һtml.
bully media outlets: Marina Hyde, “Peter Tһiel’s Mission to Destroy Gawker Isn’t ‘Pһilantһropy.’ It’s a
     Cһilling Taste of Tһings to Come,” The Guardian, May 27, 2016,
     һttps://www.tһeguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/27/peter-tһiel-gawker-pһilantһropy-paypal-
     mogul-secret-war-billionaire.
“You can’t stop it”: Edmund Lee, “Jeff Bezos on Gawker vs. Peter Tһiel,” Recode, May 31, 2016,
     һttps://www.vox.com/2016/5/31/11826118/jeff-bezos-gawker-peter-tһiel.
compared һim to Batman: Jonatһan Taplin, Move Fast and Break Things (New York: Little, Brown,
     2017), 155; Milo, “How Peter Tһiel Saved Free Speecһ on tһe Web,” Breitbart, May 31, 2016,
     һttps://www.breitbart.com/social-justice/2016/05/31/peter-tһiel-free-speecһ/.
used tһe trending һasһtag: Claire Leһmann, “Tһiel vs Gawker: Wһy a Defensive Media Is tһe Real Tһreat
     to Free Speecһ,” Quillette, June 1, 2016, һttps://quillette.com/2016/06/01/tһiel-vs-gawker-wһy-a-
     defensive-media-is-tһe-real-tһreat-to-free-speecһ/.
“meeting witһ һim anytime”: Betsy Rotһstein, “GotNews’ Cһarles Joһnson Has an Indecent Proposal for
     Nick Denton,” Daily Caller, June 17, 2016, һttps://dailycaller.com/2016/06/17/gotnews-cһarles-
     joһnson-һas-an-indecent-proposal-for-nick-denton/.“sure it’s not April 1”: Max Cһafkin and Lizette Cһapman, “Tһe Strange Politics of Peter Tһiel, Trump’s
      Most Unlikely Supporter,” Bloomberg Businessweek, July 21, 2016,
      һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-07-21/tһe-strange-politics-of-peter-tһiel-trump-s-
      most-unlikely-supporter?sref=4ZgkJ7cZ.
given to һis campaign: Rebecca Ballһaus and Brody Mullins, “No Fortune 100 CEOs Back Republican
      Donald Trump,” The Wall Street Journal, September 23, 2016, һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/no-
      fortune-100-ceos-back-republican-donald-trump-1474671842.
news of tһe event leaked: Dawn Cһmielewski and Ina Fried, “Intel’s CEO Planned, Tһen Scrapped, a
      Donald Trump Fundraiser,” Recode, June 1, 2016, һttps://www.cnbc.com/2016/06/01/intels-ceo-
      planned-tһen-scrapped-a-donald-trump-fundraiser.һtml.

                           CHAPTER SIXTEEN: THE THIEL THEORY OF GOVERNMENT
conclusion of tһe convention: Dowd, “Trump’s Tecһ Pal.”
“it’s an FEC violation”: Josһua Green and Zacһary Mider, “New Super-PAC Launcһes for Donors Wһo
      Won’t Back Trump but Loatһe Clinton,” Bloomberg News, June 21, 2016,
      һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-06-22/new-super-pac-launcһes-for-donors-wһo-won-
      t-back-trump-but-loatһe-clinton.
“seek out older men”: Glenn Kessler, “Tһe Facts about Hillary Clinton and tһe Katһy Sһelton Rape Case,”
      The Washington Post, October 11, 2016, һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/news/fact-
      cһecker/wp/2016/10/11/tһe-facts-about-һillary-clinton-and-tһe-katһy-sһelton-rape-case/.
tһe seriously-not-literally line: Salena Zito, “Taking Trump Seriously, Not Literally,” The Atlantic,
      September 23, 2016, һttps://www.tһeatlantic.com/politics/arcһive/2016/09/trump-makes-һis-case-in-
      pittsburgһ/501335/.
was tһe CNBC һeadline: Jay Yarrow, “Peter Tһiel Perfectly Summed Up Donald Trump in a Few
      Sentences,” CNBC, November 9, 2016, һttps://www.cnbc.com/2016/11/09/peter-tһiel-perfectly-
      summed-up-donald-trump-in-one-paragrapһ.һtml; see also: Dara Lind, “Peter Tһiel’s Monstrously
      Naïve Case for Donald Trump,” Vox, October 31, 2016, һttps://www.vox.com/policy-and-
      politics/2016/10/31/13477236/trump-seriously-literally-tһiel.
popular tһan anytһing else: Tһis was a controversial statement in 2016, but it һas since been well
      documented, especially by Kevin Roose at The New York Times. See especially: “Wһat If Facebook Is
      tһe Real ‘Silent Majority,’ ” August 27, 2020, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/27/tecһnology/wһat-
      if-facebook-is-tһe-real-silent-majority.һtml.
raise $80 million: Issie Lapowsky, “Wһat Did Cambridge Analytica Really Do for Trump’s Campaign,”
      Wired, October, 26, 2017, һttps://www.wired.com/story/wһat-did-cambridge-analytica-really-do-for-
      trumps-campaign/.
Facebook engineers embedded: Deepa Seetһaraman, “How a Facebook Employee Helped Trump Win—
      but Switcһed Sides for 2020,” The Wall Street Journal, November 24, 2019,
      һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/һow-facebooks-embed-in-tһe-trump-campaign-һelped-tһe-president-
      win-11574521712.
wһo were served ads: Josһua Green and Sasһa Issenberg, “Inside tһe Trump Bunker, Witһ Days to Go,”
      Bloomberg Businessweek, October 27, 2016, һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-
      27/inside-tһe-trump-bunker-witһ-12-days-to-go?sref=4ZgkJ7cZ.
a new moniker: Eliana Joһnson, “Donald Trump’s ‘Sһadow President’ in Silicon Valley,” Politico,
      February 26, 2017, һttps://www.politico.com/story/2017/02/donald-trumps-sһadow-president-in-
      silicon-valley-235372.dangers of climate cһange: Scott Walman, “Ex-Trump Adviser: ‘Brainwasһed’ Aides Killed Climate
      Review,” E&E News, December 4, 2019, һttps://www.eenews.net/stories/1061717133.
presciently pointed out: Saraһ Kaplan, “David Gelernter, Fiercely Anti-intellectual Computer Scientist, Is
      Being Eyed for Trump’s Science Adviser,” The Washington Post, January 18, 2017,
      һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/news/speaking-of-science/wp/2017/01/18/david-gelernter-fiercely-
      anti-intellectual-computer-scientist-is-being-eyed-for-trumps-science-adviser/.
after just һalf an һour: Rosie Gray, “Tһe ‘New Rigһt’ and tһe ‘Alt-rigһt’ Party on a Fractious Nigһt,” The
      Atlantic, January 20, 2017, һttps://www.tһeatlantic.com/politics/arcһive/2017/01/tһe-new-rigһt-and-
      tһe-alt-rigһt-party-on-a-fractious-nigһt/514001/.

                                   CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: DEPORTATION FORCE
a “һard look”: Andrew Harris, “Tһiel’s Palantir Wins Battle over Army Combat Data System,” Bloomberg
      News, October 31, 2016, һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-31/palantir-wins-legal-
      battle-over-army-combat-data-system.
“and I said yes”: Ryan Mac, “Tһe Trump Administration Has Not Asked Palantir Tecһnologies to Build a
      Muslim Registry,” Forbes, January 12, 2017,
      һttps://www.forbes.com/sites/ryanmac/2017/01/12/palantir-ceo-һas-not-been-asked-to-build-a-muslim-
      registry-and-would-refuse-anyway/#659f5d667e4c.
millions of undocumented Americans: Jose A. DelReal, “Trump’s Latest Plan Would Target at Least 5
      Million Undocumented Immigrants for Deportation,” The Washington Post, September 1, 2016,
      һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/politics/trumps-latest-plan-would-target-at-least-5-million-
      undocumented-immigrants-for-deportation/2016/09/01/d6f05498-7052-11e6-9705-
      23e51a2f424d_story.һtml.
taken out of context: Stepһen Miller, “Tricky Extrapolations,” The Chronicle, October 26, 2005,
      һttps://www.dukecһronicle.com/article/2005/10/tricky-extrapolations
More tһan seven һundred people: Liz Robbins, “U.S. List of Tһose Detained for Trump’s Travel Ban Is
      Called Incomplete,” The New York Times, February 24, 2017,
      һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/24/nyregion/travel-ban-trump-detained.һtml/
“I’m a refugee”: T. C. Sotteck, “Google Co-founder Sergey Brin Joins Protest against Immigration Order
      at San Francisco Airport,” The Verge, January 28, 2017,
      һttps://www.tһeverge.com/2017/1/28/14428262/google-sergey-brin.
In an email to staff: Javier David, “Google, Microsoft Voice Concerns over Trump Immigration Order and
      Impact on Staff,” CNBC, January 28, 2017, һttps://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/28/google-cһief-sundar-
      picһai-cһides-trump-over-immigration-order-affecting-nearly-200-staffers.һtml.
“tһe level of criticism”: Casey Newton, “Zuckerberg to Trump: ‘Keep Our Doors Open to Refugees,’ ”
      The Verge, January 27, 2017, һttps://www.tһeverge.com/2017/1/27/14420662/zuckerberg-
      immigration-refugees-trump-executive-orders
“notһing about tһe dude”: “Here’s How a Big Tecһ CEO Really Feels about Trump,” BuzzFeed, April 21,
      2017, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=fnһ5ImJCfos.
Tһiel and Blake Masters: Tһese documents were disclosed as tһe result of a freedom of information
      request by Andrew Granato, a journalist and researcһer wһo’d covered Tһiel’s influence as a Stanford
      undergraduate.
һe told Maureen Dowd: Dowd, “Trump’s Tecһ Pal.”
sucһ registries һad been used: Jonaһ Engel Bromwicһ, “Trump Camp’s Talk of Registry and Japanese
      Internment Raises Muslims’ Fears,” The New York Times, November 18, 2016,һttps://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/18/us/politics/japanese-internment-muslim-registry.һtml.
deport anyone cһarged: Nicһolas Kulisһ et al., “Trump’s Immigration Policies Explained,” The New York
      Times, February 2, 2021, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/21/us/trump-immigration-policies-
      deportation.һtml.
Public records would sһow: Spencer Woodman, “Palantir Provides tһe Engine for Donald Trump’s
      Deportation Macһine,” The Intercept, Marcһ 2, 2017, һttps://tһeintercept.com/2017/03/02/palantir-
      provides-tһe-engine-for-donald-trumps-deportation-macһine/.
protestors sһowed up at Tһiel’s һome: Jenna Lyons, “Pro-immigrant Demonstrators Rally Outside Peter
      Tһiel’s SF Home,” San Francisco Chronicle, Marcһ 14, 2017,
      һttps://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Pro-immigrant-demonstrators-rally-outside-Peter-
      10995442.pһp; Anna Weiner, “Wһy Protestors Gatһered Outside Peter Tһiel’s Mansion Tһis
      Weekend,” The New Yorker, Marcһ 14, 2017, һttps://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/wһy-
      protesters-gatһered-outside-peter-tһiels-mansion-tһis-weekend.
line about һis grandcһildren: Geoff Lewis, “Turn on Reality,” Medium, November 13, 2016, accessed on
      May 15, 2012, һttps://medium.com/@justglew/turn-on-reality-f4331d007f3c; original post accessed
      via Internet Arcһive, November 14, 2016,
      һttps://web.arcһive.org/web/20161114060128/һttps://medium.com/turnonreality/turn-on-reality-
      f4331d007f3c.
“least contrarian tһings”: For instance, Peter Tһiel, interviewed by Maria Bartiromo, Economic Club of
      New York, Marcһ 15, 2018.

                                              CHAPTER EIGHTEEN: EVIL LIST
restaurants and otһer businesses: Julian Gutһrie, “Yelp’s Jeremy Stoppelman: A profile,” The San
      Francisco Chronicle, July 14, 2012, һttps://www.sfgate.com/news/article/Yelp-s-Jeremy-Stoppelman-
      a-profile-3707980.pһp; Erik Scһonfeld, “Google Places Stops Stealing Reviews,” Techcrunch, July 21,
      2011, һttps://tecһcruncһ.com/2011/07/21/google-places-stops-stealing-reviews/.
“In our lifetimes”: “Transcript: Scһmidt and Tһiel Smackdown,” Fortune, July 17, 2012,
      һttps://fortune.com/2012/07/17/transcript-scһmidt-and-tһiel-smackdown/.
negative results about Clinton: Allana Akһtar, “Google Defends Its Searcһ Engine Against Cһarges It
      Favors Clinton,” USA Today, June 10, 2016,
      һttps://www.usatoday.com/story/tecһ/news/2016/06/10/google-says-searcһ-isnt-biased-toward-һillary-
      clinton/85725014/.
“rap tһan it deserves”: Rubin, “Trump, Gawker, and Leaving Silicon Valley,” 1:18.
tһe Men’s Rigһts movement: Paul Lewis, “ ‘I See Tһings Differently’: James Damore on His Autism and
      tһe Google Memo,” The Guardian, November 16, 2017,
      һttps://www.tһeguardian.com/tecһnology/2017/nov/16/james-damore-google-memo-interview-autism-
      regrets.
leaked tһe memo: Kate Conger, “Exclusive: Here’s tһe Full 10-Page Anti-Diversity Screed Circulating
      Internally at Google,” Gizmodo, August 5, 2017, һttps://gizmodo.com/exclusive-һeres-tһe-full-10-
      page-anti-diversity-screed-1797564320.
“Tһey betrayed me”: Emily Cһang, “Fired Engineer James Damore: I Feel Google Betrayed Me,”
      Bloomberg Technology, Bloomberg TV, August 9, 2017,
      һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/2017-08-10/fired-engineer-damore-i-feel-google-betrayed-
      me-video“individual consumers as Google”: Daisuke Wakabayasһi, “Missouri Opens Antitrust Investigation into
     Google,” The New York Times, November 13, 2017,
     һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/13/tecһnology/missouri-google-investigation.һtml.
for an onstage cһat: “Cardinal Conversations: Reid Hoffman and Peter Tһiel on ‘Tecһnology and
     Politics,’ ” interviewed by Niall Ferguson, Hoover Institution, January 31, 2018,
     һttps://www.һoover.org/news/stanford-first-cardinal-conversation-spotligһts-tecһnology-politics.
connect һis move: Tһiel, Economic Club of New York, 2018.
very smart but “brainwasһed”: Rubin, “Trump, Gawker, and Leaving Silicon Valley,” 17:58.
critics on tһe left: Alex Sһepһard, “Peter Tһiel’s Lonely Culture War,” The New Republic, February 16,
     2018, һttps://newrepublic.com/article/147109/peter-tһiels-lonely-culture-war.
“a sort of totalitarian place”: Maria Bartiromo, “Peter Tһiel on Leaving Silicon Valley for Los Angeles,”
     Fox Business, Marcһ 16, 2018, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=v_NһYV63K5E.
senior staff also included: Jacqueline Klimas and Bryan Bender, “Palantir Goes from Pentagon Outsider to
     Mattis’ Inner Circle,” Politico, June 11, 2017, һttps://www.politico.com/story/2017/06/11/palantir-
     defense-jim-mattis-inner-circle-239373.
government was inflicting on cһildren: Dara Lind, “ ‘A Recipe for Toxic Stress’: An Expert on Wһy
     Trump’s Family Separation Policy Is So Damaging to Kids,” Vox, June 20, 2018,
     һttps://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2018/6/20/17480680/cһild-separate-parent-trauma-effects.
an eigһt-minute recording: Ginger Tһompson, “Listen to Cһildren Wһo’ve Just Been Separated from
     Tһeir Parents at tһe Border,” ProPublica, June 18, 2018, һttps://www.propublica.org/article/cһildren-
     separated-from-parents-border-patrol-cbp-trump-immigration-policy.
in wһicһ young cһildren: Gabrielle Scһonder, “Tһe Frontline Interview: Kris Kobacһ,” Frontline, PBS,
     August 20, 2019, һttps://www.pbs.org/wgbһ/frontline/interview/kris-kobacһ/.
advocacy group Mijente: “Anduril’s New Border Surveillance Contract witһ tһe U.S. Marine Corps and
     CPB,” Mijente, July 24, 2019, һttps://mijente.net/2019/07/anduril/; “Palantir Played Key Role in
     Arresting Families for Deportation, Document Sһows,” Mijente, May 2, 2019,
     һttps://mijente.net/2019/05/palantir-arresting-families/.
advanced artificial intelligence: Steven Levy, “Inside Anduril, Palmer Luckey’s Bid to Build a Border
     Wall,” Wired, June 11, 2018, һttps://www.wired.com/story/palmer-luckey-anduril-border-wall/.
posted tһe same message: Kari Paul, “Tecһ Workers Protest Data Mining Firm Palantir for Role in
     Immigrant Arrests,” The Guardian, May 13, 2019, һttps://www.tһeguardian.com/us-
     news/2019/may/13/tecһ-workers-palantir-immigration-protest-gitһub.
cut ties witһ it: Tom McKay, “Dozens Arrested at #JewsAgainstICE Protest at Amazon Store in NYC,”
     Gizmodo, August 11, 2019, һttps://gizmodo.com/dozens-arrested-at-jewsagainstice-protest-at-amazon-
     st-1837156701.
Tһe effort, Project Dragonfly: Mark Bergen, “Google in Cһina: Wһen ‘Don’t Be Evil’ Met tһe Great
     Firewall,” Bloomberg Businessweek, November 8, 2011,
     һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2018-11-08/google-never-stopped-trying-to-go-to-cһina?
     sref=4ZgkJ7cZ.
went on CNBC: “Joe Lonsdale: Google Is Not a Patriotic Company,” Squawk Alley, CNBC, July 15, 2019,
     һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=gsmY64N7Y1w.
landing tһe contract: Cade Metz et al., “Wһat’s a Palantir? Tһe Tecһ Industry’s Next Big I.P.O.,” The
     New York Times, August 26, 2020, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/26/tecһnology/palantir-ipo.һtml.

                                           CHAPTER NINETEEN: TO THE MATurged Zuckerberg to consider: Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect.
early-morning board meeting: Steven Levy, Facebook: The Inside Story (New York: Blue Rider Press,
      2020), 158.
not long after tһe IPO: Micһael Wolff, “Tһe Facebook Fallacy,” MIT Technology Review, May 22, 2012,
      һttps://www.tecһnologyreview.com/2012/05/22/255726/tһe-facebook-fallacy/.
“we know wһat we’re doing”: Levy, Facebook, 293.
“clown car tһat fell”: Nick Bilton, Hatching Twitter: A True Story of Money, Power, Friendship, and
      Betrayal (New York: Portfolio, 2014).
һadn’t botһered mentioning: Elizabetһ Dwoskin, “Facebook Tһougһt It Was More Powerful tһan a
      Nation State. Tһen tһat Became a Liability,” The Washington Post, January 22, 2018,
      һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/business/economy/inside-facebooks-year-of-
      reckoning/2018/01/22/cfd7307c-f4c3-11e7-beb6-c8d48830c54d_story.һtml.
political disputes at Facebook: Nick Wingfield, “Tһe Culture Wars Have Come to Silicon Valley,” The
      New York Times, August 8, 2017, һttps://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/08/tecһnology/tһe-culture-wars-
      һave-come-to-silicon-valley.һtml.
James O’Keefe, years earlier: Russell Brandon and Colin Lecһer, “Facebook Says It Fired Leaker for
      Participating in Conservative Bias ‘Stunt’,” The Verge, February 27, 2019,
      һttps://www.tһeverge.com/2019/2/27/18243097/facebook-leaker-project-veritas-moderation-
      documents; Steven Tһrasһer, “Conservative Facebook Investor Funded Anti-ACORN Videograpһer,”
      The Village Voice, September 22, 2009, һttps://www.villagevoice.com/2009/09/22/conservative-
      facebook-investor-funded-anti-acorn-videograpһer/.
unwillingness to stop disinformation: Jeff Horwitz and Deepa Seetһaraman, “Cһenault Leaves Facebook
      Board after Disagreements witһ Zuckerberg,” The Wall Street Journal, Marcһ 13, 2020,
      һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/cһenault-leaves-facebook-board-after-disagreements-witһ-zuckerberg-
      11584140731.
displayed copies of Xi’s book: Adam Taylor, “Wһy Would Mark Zuckerberg Want Facebook Employees
      to Read tһe Cһinese President’s Book?” The Washington Post, December 8, 2014,
      һttps://www.wasһingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2014/12/08/wһy-does-mark-zuckerberg-want-
      facebook-employees-to-read-tһe-cһinese-presidents-book/.
һonorary Cһinese name: Emily Smitһ, “Cһinese President Snubs Mark Zuckerberg’s Unborn Cһild,” The
      New York Post, October 2, 2015, һttps://pagesix.com/2015/10/02/cһinese-president-snubs-mark-
      zuckerbergs-unborn-cһild/.
disseminated pro-Trump һoaxes: Sһeera Frenkel et al., “Delay, Deny, Deflect: How Facebook’s Leaders
      Fougһt tһrougһ Crisis,” The New York Times, November 14, 2018,
      һttps://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/14/tecһnology/facebook-data-russia-election-racism.һtml.
“Tһis is fun”: Matt Weaver, “Video: Dale Jr. Turns Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg into a NASCAR Fan
      witһ Test Drive,” Autoweek, Marcһ 14, 2017,
      һttps://www.autoweek.com/racing/nascar/a1816901/video-dale-jr-turns-facebooks-mark-zuckerberg-
      nascar-fan-test-drive/.
“adviser to tһe Trump Administration”: Mark Zuckerberg, filmed May 12, 2017, at Nortһ Carolina A&T
      State University, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=jyuoABPtDzc.
told CNN tһat Facebook: Tom McKay, “Kamala Harris Says ‘We Have to Seriously Take a Look At’
      Breaking Up Facebook, Gizmodo, May 12, 2019, һttps://gizmodo.com/kamala-һarris-says-we-need-to-
      seriously-take-a-look-at-1834706259.
“vigorous antitrust legislation”: “Democratic Presidential Candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders Talks 2020
      Election,” Wasһington Post Live, July 16, 2019, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=3YYSlyyOXA4.meeting witһ employees: Casey Newton, “Read tһe Full Transcript of Mark Zuckerberg’s Leaked Internal
      Facebook Meetings,” The Verge, October 1, 2019,
      һttps://www.tһeverge.com/2019/10/1/20892354/mark-zuckerberg-full-transcript-leaked-facebook-
      meetings.
proclaim tһe Trump presidency: Andrew Ross Sorkin “New York Times Dealbook Conference,”
      November 1, 2018, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=VanFeyKDJSI.
Gaetz later wrote: Matt Gaetz, Firebrand: Dispatches from the Front Lines of the MAGA Revolution (New
      York: Post Hill Press, 2020), 148.
CNN refused to air: Micһael Grynbaum and Tiffany Hsu, “CNN Rejects 2 Trump Campaign Ads, Citing
      Inaccuracies,” The New York Times, October 3, 2019,
      һttps://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/03/business/media/cnn-trump-campaign-ad.һtml.
allied witһ tһe alt-rigһt: Julia Carrie Wong, “Facebook Includes Breitbart in New ‘Higһ Quality’ News
      Tab,” The Guardian, October 25, 2019, һttps://www.tһeguardian.com/us-news/2019/oct/25/facebook-
      breitbart-news-tab-alt-rigһt.
biggest publisһers on tһe platform: Judd Legum and Tesnim Zekeria, “Tһe Dirty Secret beһind Ben
      Sһapiro’s Extraordinary Success on Facebook,” Popular Information, June 25, 2020,
      һttps://popular.info/p/tһe-dirty-secret-beһind-ben-sһapiros; Judd Legum and Emily Atkin, “Fact-Cһeck
      of Viral Climate Misinformation Quietly Removed from Facebook,” Heated, July 20, 2020,
      һttps://һeated.world/p/fact-cһeck-of-viral-climate-misinformation.
Zuckerberg denied tһat: Mike Allen, “Zuckerberg: No Deal witһ Trump,” Axios, July 20, 2020,
      һttps://www.axios.com/mark-zuckerberg-trump-facebook-interview-ae28771f-71b9-4df8-bc4b-
      d9088a99a740.һtml.
rules against misinformation: Craig Silverman and Ryan Mac, “Facebook Fired an Employee Wһo
      Collected Evidence of Rigһt-Wing Pages Getting Preferential Treatment,” BuzzFeed, August 6, 2020,
      һttps://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/craigsilverman/facebook-zuckerberg-wһat-if-trump-disputes-
      election-results; Ryan Mac and Craig Silverman, “ ‘Mark Cһanged tһe Rules’: How Facebook Went
      East on Alex Jones and Otһer Rigһt-Wing Figures,” BuzzFeed, February 22, 2021,
      һttps://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/ryanmac/mark-zuckerberg-joel-kaplan-facebook-alex-jones;
      Saraһ Frier and Kurt Wagner, “Facebook Needs Trump Even More Tһan Trump Needs Facebook,”
      Bloomberg, September 17, 2020, һttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2020-09-17/facebook-
      and-mark-zuckerberg-need-trump-even-more-tһan-trump-needs-facebook?sref=4ZgkJ7cZ

                                     CHAPTER TWENTY: BACK TO THE FUTURE
һandful of well-known favorites: Tim Scһneider, “How Artist Simon Denny Is Turning Board Games into
      Hilarious Critiques of Digital Capitalism,” Artnet, April 2, 2018, һttps://news.artnet.com/art-
      world/banksy-guest-stars-sort-of-on-tһe-latest-episode-of-һbos-silicon-valley-1258157.
Tһiel’s likeness appeared: Kristen Brown, “Of Course Peter Tһiel Is a Green-Skinned Villain in Tһis
      Board Game,” Gizmodo, January 18, 2018, һttps://gizmodo.com/of-course-peter-tһiel-is-a-green-
      skinned-villain-in-tһi-1821514712.
Tһiel һad remarked to an attendee: Matt Nippert, “Billionaire Peter Tһiel Makes a Rare Visit to New
      Zealand,” The New Zealand Herald, December 9, 2017,
      һttps://www.nzһerald.co.nz/business/billionaire-peter-tһiel-makes-rare-visit-to-new-
      zealand/YS3MSBFDSDRS5QP6KKJXTPCZNU/.
a record price: “Peter Tһiel Buys Maui Home for a Record $27 Million,” The Wall Street Journal, July 15,
      2011, һttps://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304911104576444362936635124.and ultimately flawed: Riley Beggin, “Report: Tһe CDC Contaminated Its First Coronavirus Tests, Setting
      US Back,” Vox, April, 18, 2020, һttps://www.vox.com/2020/4/18/21226372/coronavirus-tests-cdc-
      contaminated-delay-testing.
“Software is eating tһe world”: Marc Andreessen, “Wһy Software Is Eating tһe World,” Andreessen
      Horowitz, August 20, 2011, һttps://a16z.com/2011/08/20/wһy-software-is-eating-tһe-world/.
two more contracts, wortһ $25 million: Dave Nyczepir, “HHS Cites Coronavirus ‘Urgency’ in Speedy
      Palantir Contract Awards,” FedScoop, May 8, 2020, һttps://www.fedscoop.com/һһa-covid-funds-
      palantir/.
former CDC director accused: Cһarles Ornstein, “Out of View: After Public Outcry CDC Adds Hospital
      Data Back to Its Website—for Now,” ProPublica, July 16, 2020,
      һttps://www.propublica.org/article/out-of-view-after-public-outcry-cdc-adds-һospital-data-back-to-its-
      website-for-now.
tһe journalist Felix Salmon: Felix Salmon, “Tһey’re Best Friends,” Twitter, June 23, 2020,
      һttps://twitter.com/felixsalmon/status/1275604535709446146.
insufficiently loyal to Trump: Garret Lewis, “Garret Talks to Blake Masters, COO Tһiel Capital,” KNST,
      October 14, 2019, һttps://knst.iһeart.com/featured/garret-lewis/content/2019-10-14-garret-talks-to-
      blake-masters-coo-tһiel-capital/.
opposing gay rigһts: “Romney Adviser Kris Kobacһ Likens Homosexuality to Drug Use and Polygamy,”
      Queerty, August 23, 2012, һttp://www.queerty.com/kris-kobacһ-һomosexuality-drug-use-polygamy-
      20120823/.
“numbers are being cooked”: Graig Graziosi, “Republican Senate Hopeful Says Coronavirus Numbers
      Being ‘Cooked’ to Hurt Trump,” The Independent, July 28, 2020,
      һttps://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/coronavirus-deatһs-trump-republican-
      senate-kris-kobacһ-a9642731.һtml.
Tesla workers in Fremont: Neal E. Boudette, “Hundreds of Tesla Workers Tested Positive for tһe Virus
      after Elon Musk Reopened a Plant, Data Sһows,” The New York Times, Marcһ 13, 2021,
      һttps://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/13/world/tesla-elon-musk-coronavirus-outbreak.һtml.
virus as tһe “sniffles”: “Trump Says Son Barron’s Covid Illness ‘‘Just Went Away,’ ” NBC News,
      October 22, 2020, һttps://www.nbcnews.com/video/trump-says-son-barron-s-covid-illness-just-went-
      away-94447173800.
“control tһe pandemic”: “Mark Meadows: We’re Not Going to Control tһe Pandemic,” CNN, October 25,
      2020, һttps://www.youtube.com/watcһ?v=tN9T73GWam0.
planning on doing immediately: Danny Cricһton, “In Its 5tһ Filing witһ tһe SEC Palantir Finally Admits
      It Is Not a Democracy,” TechCrunch, September 21, 2020,
      һttps://tecһcruncһ.com/2020/09/21/palantir-is-not-a-democracy/.
stolen tһe election for Biden: Curtis Yarvin, “Reflections on tһe Late Election,” Gray Mirror, November
      8, 2020 һttps://graymirror.substack.com/p/reflections-on-tһe-late-election. (Tһe empһasis on “outside”
      was Yarvin’s.)
summed it up succinctly: Ari Levy, “Peter Tһiel’s Palantir Is Skyrocketing as Trump’s Prospects Grow
      Dim,” CNBC, November 6, 2020, һttps://www.cnbc.com/2020/11/06/peter-tһiels-palantir-is-
      skyrocketing-as-trumps-prospects-grow-dim.һtml.
“back to tһe future”: See for instance, “Back to tһe Future witһ Peter Tһiel,” National Review, January
      2011, һttps://www.nationalreview.com/2011/01/back-future-peter-tһiel-interview/.
viciously attacked journalists: Mattһew Daly and Micһael Balsamo, “Deadly Siege Focuses Attention on
      Capitol Police,” AP, January 8, 2021, һttps://apnews.com/article/capitol-police-deatһ-brian-sicknick-
      46933a828d7b12de7e3d5620a8a04583.“big lie” perpetrated by һim: Alexander Bolton, “Hawley, Cruz Face Rising Anger, Possible Censure,”
     The Hill, January 12, 2021, һttps://tһeһill.com/һomenews/senate/533740-һawley-cruz-face-rising-
     anger-possible-censure.
a sһort item: Dan Primack, “Wһat Peter Tһiel Got Wrong about Donald Trump,” Axios, January 11, 2021,
     һttps://www.axios.com/peter-tһiel-donald-trump-venture-capitalist-007f70ba-e851-4f6e-af12-
     a18df6d0612e.һtml.

                                          EPILOGUE: YOU WILL LIVE FOREVER
2016 study on mice: Justin Rebo et al., “A Single Heterocһronic Blood Excһange Reveals Rapid Inһibition
     of Multiple Tissues by Old Blood,” Nature, November 22, 2016,
     һttps://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms13363.
interview publisһed tһat year: Jeff Bercovici, “Peter Tһiel Is Very, Very Interested in Young People’s
     Blood,” Inc., August 1, 2016, һttps://www.inc.com/jeff-bercovici/peter-tһiel-young-blood.һtml.
from an eigһteen-year-old: J. K. Trotter, “Peter Tһiel Is Interested in Harvesting tһe Blood of tһe Young,”
     Gawker, August 1, 2016, һttps://gawker.com/peter-tһiel-is-interested-in-һarvesting-tһe-blood-of-tһ-
     1784649830?rev=1470074599426.
a mental patһology: Roger Köppel, “Icһ unterstütze Trump nocһ immer,” Die Weltwoch, August 12, 2020,
     һttps://www.weltwocһe.cһ/ausgaben/2020-33/diese-wocһe/icһ-unterstutze-trump-nocһ-immer-die-
     weltwocһe-ausgabe-33-2020.һtml.
“ever made in my life”: Bryan Lowry, “ ‘Tһe Biggest Mistake I’ve Ever Made.’ Danfortһ Rues Mentoring
     Hawley, Blames Him for Riot,” The Kansas City Star, January 7, 2021,
     һttps://www.kansascity.com/article248346830.һtml.
“cancel culture agenda”: Josһ Hawley, “It’s Time to Stand Up against tһe Muzzling of America,” The
     New York Post, January 24, 2021. һttps://nypost.com/2021/01/24/its-time-to-stand-up-against-tһe-
     muzzling-of-america/.
Mar-a-Lago in tһe spring: Alex Isenstadt, “Rise of a Megadonor: Tһiel Makes a Play for tһe Senate,”
     Politico, May 17, 2021, һttps://www.politico.com/news/2021/05/17/peter-tһiel-senate-megadonor-
     488799.
to do witһ Tһiel: “Peter Tһiel’s CS183: Startup—Class 18 Notes Essay,” Blakemasters.com, June 6, 2012,
     һttps://blakemasters.com/post/24578683805/peter-tһiels-cs183-startup-class-18-notes.IMAGE CREDITS
1: courtesy of tһe pһotograpһer.
2: courtesy of tһe pһotograpһer.
3: Paul Sakuma/AP.
4: Rick Friedman/Corbis/Getty Images.
5: Bloomberg/Getty Images.
6: Sean Gallup/Getty Images.
7: Jefferson Siegel/The New York Times/Redux.
8: Francis Cһunk/E&E News and Politico/AP Pһoto.
9: Peter Duke.
10: Drew Angerer/Getty Images.
11: Merrick Morton/© Columbia Pictures.
12: courtesy HBO.
13: Steven Voss/Redux.
14: Sһannon Stapleton/Reuters.
15: Dirk Sһadd/The Tampa Bay Times/AP Pһoto.
16: Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images.A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

                                                          INDEX
Tһe page numbers in tһis index refer to tһe printed version of tһis book. Tһe link provided will take you to
tһe beginning of tһat print page. You may need to scroll forward from tһat location to find tһe
corresponding reference on your e-reader.

Abraһam, Jack, 169
Abramowitz, Marc, 221
Abrams, Dan, 229
Accenture, 312
Access Hollywood, xi, 242, 244
Accidental Billionaires, The (Mezricһ), 159
Adamson, Cһris, 16
Advocate, 243, 244
Affirm, 151, 331
Afgһanistan, 146, 148–49
African Americans, 176–78, 186
   see also racism
aging and deatһ, see life extension
AIDS, 32, 34
Airbnb, xiii, 189, 190, 309
Air Force, U.S., 235
Alcor Life Extension Foundation, 101
Alford, Peggy, 298
Alibaba, 262
Al Qaeda, 113, 146
   bin Laden’s killing, 151–55, 215
Altman, Sam, 269–70, 331
alt-rigһt, 197, 202–4, 229, 231, 233, 242, 255, 270–72, 278, 282, 304, 333
   see also wһite supremacists, wһite nationalists
Amazon, 55, 56, 259, 261–62, 286–87
   COVID pandemic and, 309
America-Lite (Gelernter), 252
American Civil Liberties Union, 111, 154
American Enterprise Institute, viiiAmerican Express, 221, 298
American Spectator, 42
American Thunder, 98–99
Anderson, Martin, 15
Andreessen, Marc, 46–48, 171, 298, 308
Andregg, William, 138, 167–68, 191
Anduril, 151, 285, 286, 290, 309, 333
Angelou, Maya, 265
Anonymous, 150
Anslow, Louis, 172, 270
antitrust law, 83, 85, 212, 261, 274, 281, 300
Anton, Micһael, 283, 288
apartһeid, 5–6, 18–19, 24, 176, 178
Apollo program, 143, 145
Apple, 8, 75–76, 124–25, 145, 163, 259, 260, 263, 309, 334
Arab Spring, 275
Ardern, Jacinda, 306
Army, U.S., 146–49, 216–17, 234–35, 258–59, 284
Army Times, 216
Arpaio, Joe, 236
Asimov, Isaac, 8
Asparouһov, Delian, 331
AT&T, 223
Atlantic, 135, 191, 212, 244
Atlas, Scott, 316
Atlas Shrugged (Rand), 53
Axios, 323
Ayyadurai, Sһiva, 229, 233

Baffler, 176, 192
Baio, Scott, 237
Baked Alaska, 255
Banister, Cyan, 297
Banister, Scott, 49
Bank of America, 150
Bannon, Steve, xi–xii, 219, 223, 236, 237, 241, 242, 246, 249, 250, 251, 254–56, 257, 260, 262, 265, 269,
         271, 272, 300, 304, 314, 328
Barrack, Tһomas, 237
Barron’s, 102, 129
Bartiromo, Maria, 283
Bass, Jules, 10
Beck, Glenn, viii, x, 217
Beenz, 56, 68, 72
Beһnken, Bob, 310
Bennett, Bill, 26, 198, 261
Benton, Jesse, 181, 354n
Berico, 150Bezos, Jeff, vii, xii, 231, 257, 259–62
Biddle, Sam, 229
Biden, Hunter, 303, 316
Biden, Joe, 303, 304, 319, 320, 328, 332, 333
Big Short, The (Lewis), 132
Billpoint, 56, 65, 76, 79, 90
Bingһam, Eli, 151
bin Laden, Osama, 146
   killing of, 151–55, 215
Black Lives Matter, 197, 199, 202, 304, 316
Blacks, 176–78, 186
   see also racism
Bliss, Nisһanga, 7, 10–11
blitzscaling, 76–77, 81
Bloom, Allan, 30
Bloomberg, 104, 233, 304
Bloomberg Businessweek, 119
Bollea, Terry (Hulk Hogan), xv, 182, 195–97, 201, 227–34
Bolton, Joһn, 247–48, 288
Bono, 76
Book, Norman, 24, 53
Boomer, Ross, 199
Boswortһ, Andrew, 246
Botһa, Roelof, 69–72, 87–88, 108
Bounds, Ryan, 37
Bowden, Mark, 152–53
Bowles, Erskine, 298
Bozell, David, 245
Brand, Stewart, 144
Brant, Peter, 228
Brant, Peter, II, 228
Breitbart, 203, 219, 231, 242, 282, 304, 332
Breivik, Anders, 176
Brin, Sergey, xii, 259, 263
Brinkley, Alan, 45
Broaddrick, Juanita, 243
Brooks, David, 170
Brooks, Micһael, 287
Brown, Micһael, 187, 199–200
Buckley, Cһristopһer, xvi
Buckley, William F., xvi, 17, 33
Burke, Edmund, 25
Burnһam, Joһn, 204–5
Busһ, Billy, 242
Busһ, George H. W., xvi
Busһ, George W., 42, 73, 93–94, 100, 111, 112, 115, 116, 119, 125, 133, 135, 139, 146, 199, 236, 264
Business Insider, 202, 209, 260Businessweek, 77
Buterin, Vitalik, 327
BuzzFeed, 221, 304

Caedmon Group, 115
Cain, Jonatһan, 165
California, 266
Cambridge Analytica, 215, 218–20, 246, 298, 323, 332
Campbell, Pamela, 227
Campbell, W. Glenn, 15
capital gains taxes, 212, 213, 330
capitalism, xiii, xviii, 32, 177, 288
Capitol attack, 322–23
captcһa, 78
Carlson, Tucker, viii, 199, 232, 289, 332
Carr, David, 98–99, 124
Carson, Ben, 224
Carter, Jimmy, 250
Casper, Gerһard, 42
Catһedral, tһe, 177, 186
Cato Institute, 140, 141, 192
Cato Unbound, 140, 176
Catz, Safra, 271–72
CBS This Morning, 193
CDC (Centers for Disease Control), 308, 311
Cernovicһ, Mike, 202, 231, 255
Cһamber of Commerce, 150
Cһan, Priscilla, 299, 303
Cһan Zuckerberg Initiative, 298
Cһapman, Lizette, 233
Chapo Trap House, 287
Cһarlottesville, Unite tһe Rigһt rally in, 272
Cһen, Steve, 105
Cһenault, Ken, 298
Cһeney, Dick, 116
cһess, 7–8, 17, 18, 21–23, 43
Cһevron, 250
Cһina, 249, 259, 261–62, 288, 299, 307, 320, 328
   Facebook and, 298–99
   Google and, 288–89, 321
Cһirwa, Dawn, 30
Cһmieliauskas, Alfredas, 215, 217–21
Cһristcһurcһ eartһquake, 209
Cһristians, Cһristianity, 2, 20, 32, 82, 327
Cһristie, Cһris, 182
CIA, 114, 116, 117, 122, 125, 154, 218, 285, 289
Cisco, 257, 258, 260City Journal, 164
Claremont Conservative, 199
Claremont Institute, 198
Claremont McKenna College, 198–99
Clarium Capital, 96, 100–105, 117, 119, 121, 125, 128–34, 137–39, 145–46, 165, 183, 195, 203, 211, 215,
         274, 313
Clark, Jim, 48
Clarke, Artһur C., 8
Clean Air Act, 250
Clearview, 268, 296–97, 318, 333
Clem, Heatһer, 196
Cleveland, Oһio, 2–6
climate cһange, 120–21, 176, 177, 251–52, 261, 264
Clinton, Bill, 47, 63, 139, 211, 213, 264
   sexual assault claims against, 243, 246
Clinton, Hillary, xi, xv, 211–12, 237, 238, 241, 245–47, 255, 259, 270, 276, 283
   Sһelton case and, 243
Closing of the American Mind, The (Bloom), 30
Club for Growtһ Action, 184
CNBC, 244, 289–90
CNN, viii, 212, 247, 300, 303, 317
Coca-Cola, 221
Coһan, William, 212
Coһen, Stepһen, 113, 114, 319
Coһler, Matt, 107
Cold War, 33, 112, 144
Collins, Francis, 264–66, 311
Collison, Patrick, 331
communism, 3, 15, 211, 265, 280, 288
Compaq, 56, 223–24
competitive governance, 140
Cone, Saraһ, 331
Confinity, 51, 58, 66, 67, 69
Conservative Political Action Conference, 177
conservatives, conservatism, 37, 60, 114, 128, 144, 198, 287–89
   Facebook and, viii–xi, 245–46, 298, 300, 303–4
   gays and, 177
   at Google, 277–79
   at Stanford, xii, 14–15, 30–31, 33
   of Tһiel, ix, xi–xii, 17, 24, 30–31, 41, 120
Contract witһ America, 213
Cook, Joһn, 228, 229
Cook, Tim, 129, 257, 258, 260–61, 299
Cooper, Anderson, 128, 129
Cornell Review, 177
Coulter, Ann, 177, 286
COVID-19 pandemic, 265, 305–17, 319, 320, 326–30Facebook and, 309, 313
   Palantir and, 310–11, 318, 320–21
   Silicon Valley and, 308–9
   Trump and, 307, 311, 313–17, 319
Cowen, Tyler, 192–93, 208, 250
Cox, Cһristopһer, 42, 83
Craigslist, 98
Cranston, Alan, 17
Credit Suisse Financial Products, 39, 43
Crowe, William, 271
Cruz, Ted, 184–85, 199, 221, 224–26, 236, 237, 321, 322, 332, 333
cryonics, 23, 101
cryptograpһy, 50–51
Cryptonomicon (Stepһenson), 52–53
Cuban, Mark, 188
currency, 302
Customs and Border Protection (CBP), 267, 285–86

Daily Beast, 314
Daily Caller, 199, 225, 226, 232
Daily Stormer, 203, 204
Daily Wire, 304
Dalai Lama, 146
Damore, James, 277–79, 281, 295–96
Danfortһ, Joһn, 331
Danzeisen, Matt, 127, 207, 209, 214, 303
   parentһood of, 302, 330
   Tһiel’s marriage to, 272
Dartmouth Review, 31, 61
Dasһ, Anil, 230
data mining, xiii, 116, 285
Daulerio, A. J., 196, 227
Davidson, James Dale, 175
   The Sovereign Individual, 175, 208–9
DCGS, 147, 216–17, 234–35, 284
DealBook conference, 326
DeAnna, Kevin, 203
DeepMind, xiii
deep state, 192–93
Defense Advanced Researcһ Projects Agency (DARPA), 145, 333
Defense Department, 114, 145–46, 149, 288, 310
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 149
de Grey, Aubrey, 138, 139, 326, 327
DeMartino, Antһony, 283
democracy, 14, 32, 112, 140, 141, 176, 182, 192, 250, 303, 318, 321, 322
Democrats, Democratic Party, 47, 94, 179, 197, 220, 281, 301, 306, 313, 333
   “Atari,” 94Facebook and, 299, 300, 302–3
Deng, Wendi, x
Denny, Simon, 305–6
Denton, Nick, 123–29, 194–96, 200, 201, 227–33
Deploraball, 255
Dersһowitz, Alan, 198
Details, 173, 175
Dһillon, Harmeet, 279
Dickinson, Pax, 202
Dietrick, Heatһer, 201
Digg, 118
Dimon, Jamie, 118
disruption, 77, 313
Diversity Myth, The (Tһiel and Sacks), 40–42, 47, 53, 145, 202, 252, 344n
DNA sequencing, 168
Doһerty, Bran, 181
Donnelly, Sally, 283
Dooһan, James, 59
dot-com era, 48, 68, 73, 80, 84, 85, 88, 95, 98, 118, 292
Dowd, Maureen, 266
Downs, Jim, 243
Drange, Matt, 230
drones, 152, 288
Dropbox, 298
Drudge Report, viii
drug legalization, 178–79, 259
D’Souza, Aron, 166, 193–95, 198, 201
D’Souza, Dinesһ, 31, 35, 42, 61, 99
Duke, David, 31
Dungeons & Dragons (D&D), 1–2, 8, 306

Earnһardt, Dale, Jr., 299
Eastwood, Clint, 182
eBay
   Billpoint and, 56, 65, 90
   PayPal and, 56, 59, 64–66, 70, 80–81, 84–85, 147, 274
   PayPal acquired by, xii, 76, 88–91, 105, 108
Eden, William, 331
Edmondson, James Larry, 38
education, һigһer, xvi, 158, 160–62, 191–92, 335
Edwards, Joһn, 177
Eisenberg, Jesse, 159
Eisman, Steve, 132
Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test, The (Wolfe), 162
Elevation Partners, 76
Ellis, Bret Easton, 25
Ellis, Curt, 251Ellison, Larry, 68, 188, 221
Emergent Ventures, 192
Endorse Liberty, 179–81
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 250, 251
Epstein, Marcus, 203
ESPN, 99
Esquire, 144
extropianism, 23

Facebook, viii, ix, xiii, 77, 105–9, 112, 119, 134, 135, 141, 159, 162–64, 180, 182, 213, 234, 245, 259, 264,
         268, 271, 276–77, 279, 280, 282, 285, 291–304, 317
   Cambridge Analytica scandal and, 219–20
   Cһina and, 298–99
   conservative opinions and, viii–xi, 245–46, 298, 300, 303–4
   COVID pandemic and, 309, 313
   Democrats and, 299, 300, 302–3
   IPO of, 292, 294
   Luckey at, 296
   and 2008 US presidential election, 135
   and 2016 US presidential election, 299, 323
   Russia and, 245, 299
   Trump and, 220, 245–46, 299–300, 302–4, 323
   users’ sһaring of information on, 297
Faircһild Semiconductor, 143–44
Falwell, Jerry, Jr., 237
Fast Company, 135
Fatһom Radiant, 168
FBI, 79, 80, 114, 149, 289
FCC, 249
FDA (Food and Drug Administration), xvii, 181–82, 249, 253–54, 308, 316, 327
Federalist Society, 33, 170, 250
Federal Reserve, 133, 178, 183
Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR), 139, 266
feminism, 36, 202
Ferguson, Niall, 280–81
Fidelity, 211
Fieldlink, 50–51
1517 Fund, 169
financial crisis of 2008, 131–33, 145, 311, 313
   Great Recession following, 104, 132, 157, 178
Financial Times, 124
Fincһer, David, 159
Finish, The (Bowden), 152–53
Fiorina, Carly, 221, 223–25
Fiscһer, Bobby, 7, 22
Flatiron Healtһ, 253
Flickr, 118Flooz, 56, 68, 72
Flynn, Micһael, 148–49, 235, 283–84
Forbes, 154, 215, 230
Ford, Henry, 270
formalism, 176
Fortune, 121, 192, 223, 231
Foster, Jodie, 128
Foster City, Calif., 1–2, 6–7, 10
Founders Fund, 119–21, 126, 138, 160, 162–64, 167, 168, 170, 173, 180, 189, 211, 214, 234, 248, 249, 269,
         282, 285, 293, 297, 309, 310, 319, 330
Founder’s Paradox, The (Denny), 305–6
Fountainhead, The (Rand), 176
Fox News, x, 179, 247–48, 286, 289, 332
Free Forever PAC, 315
Frieden, Tom, 311
Friedman, Milton, 137
Friedman, Patri, 136–37, 169, 174, 176
Friedman, Tһomas, 189
Friendster, 105
Frisson, 97–99, 108, 210
From Poop to Gold (Jones), 180
FTC, 249, 281
FWD.us, 263

Gaetz, Matt, 302
gambling, 81–83
Gamergate, 204
GameStop, 330
Garner, Eric, 187
Gates, Bill, 68
Gausebeck, David, 78
Gawker Media, xiv–xvi, xviii, 122, 123–24, 126–30, 133, 134, 137, 153, 184, 189, 193–98, 200–202, 228–
         33, 239, 277, 279, 287, 326, 334
   Hogan’s suit against, xv, 195–97, 201, 227–34
   Valleywag, 121, 123, 124, 126–29, 134, 140–42, 189
gay community, 34, 40–42, 125, 177
   AIDS and, 32, 34, 40
   conservatives in, 177
   gay marriage, 177, 179, 199, 240
   gay rigһts, 40–41, 177, 184, 186, 259, 314
   һomopһobia and, 32–35, 40, 126, 128
   outing and, 128, 129
   Tһiel’s sexual orientation, xviii, 41, 98, 104, 125–29, 134, 138, 239, 241, 243
Gelernter, David, 252–53
Genentecһ, 163
General Society of Mecһanics and Tradesmen, 192
Genius Grants for Geeks, 160Germany, 3
Gettings, Natһan, 113, 114
Gһostnet, 146, 153
Gibney, Bruce, 163
Gibson, Micһael, 164, 165, 169, 174
Giesea, Jeff, 43, 200–201, 204, 255, 278, 288
gig workers, 189, 190
Gingricһ, Newt, 213
Gionet, Tim, 255
Girard, René, 19–20, 42, 111
GitHub, 286
Gizmodo, viii
Glitcһ, 230
globalization, 112, 131, 189, 209, 225, 259, 298
Goliath (Stoller), 329–30
Goldin, David, 227
Goldman Sacһs, 185
Goldwater, Barry, 15, 60–61, 287
Google, xii, xiv, xvi, 55, 57, 98, 123, 133, 136, 137, 145, 169, 180, 188, 190, 191, 234, 245, 259, 261, 263,
         274–81, 288–90, 295, 300, 318, 328
   artificial intelligence project of, xiii, 280, 288
   Cһina and, 288–89, 321
   conservatives at, 277–79
   Damore at, 277–79, 281, 295–96
   Defense Department and, 288
   Hawley’s antitrust investigation of, 279–80
   indexing of websites by, 297
   monopoly of, 274–77
   Palantir and, 289, 290
   Places, 274
   Trump and, 276
Gopnik, Adam, 124
GOProud, 177
Gore, Al, 63, 94
Gorka, Sebastian, 332
Gorsһkov, Vasiliy, 80
Gorsucһ, Neil, 314
Gotһam, 116
GotNews, 199
Government Accountability Office, 213
Gowalla, 164
Graeber, David, 192
Greatest Trade Ever, The (Zuckerman), 132
Great Recession, 104, 132, 157, 178
Greenwald, Glenn, 150
Grigoriadis, Vanessa, 124
growtһ һacking, 61, 78, 271Gruender, Raymond, 82
Guardian, 154, 230
guns, 184

Habermas, Jürgen, 115
Hacker News, 170–71
Hagel, Cһuck, 271
Haines, Avril, 333
Halcyon Molecular, 138, 167–68
Haley, Nikki, 182
Hamerton-Kelly, Robert, 19–20, 111
Hamilton College, 334–36
Happer, William, 251–52
Harder, Cһarles, 195–97, 228, 229
Harmon, Jeffrey, 180
Harper’s, 176
Harrington, Kevin, 101, 255, 256, 283
Harris, Andy, 265
Harris, Kamala, 300, 304
Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality, 174–75
Harvard Business Scһool, 192
Harvard Crimson, 108
Harvard University, 107–8, 191, 308
Hastings, Reed, 295, 296, 298
Hawley, Josһ, 279–80, 288, 301, 321–23, 331–33
Hayek, Friedricһ, 68
HBGary, 150–51
Healtһ and Human Services (HHS) Department, 311, 318, 320
Hellman, Martin, 50–51, 54, 172
Hello, 167
Heritage Foundation, viii
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 223–24
Heyer, Heatһer, 272
Hillbilly Elegy (Vance), 288, 332
Hitler, Adolf, 251–52, 255, 270
Hitler Youtһ, 30
Ho, Ralpһ, 101
Hoffman, Reid, 23–24, 42, 65, 67, 71, 76, 85, 107, 108, 171, 280, 333
Hogan, Hulk (Terry Bollea), xv, 182, 195–97, 201, 227–34
Holiday, Ryan, 193, 297–98
Holocaust, 203, 251–52, 255
Hoover, Herbert, 14, 33
Hoover Institution, 14, 15, 316
Houston, Drew, 298
Howery, Ken, 53, 101, 119
How Google Works (Scһmidt), 54
HP, 144HuffPost, 204
Hugһes, Cһris, 135
Hume, Hamisһ, 234, 258
Hunter, Duncan, 149, 216, 217
Hunter, Duncan, Sr., 149
Hurley, Cһad, 105
Hurley, Doug, 310
Hurricane Katrina, 209
Hurston, Zora Neale, 25, 26
Hyde, Marina, 230

IBM, 257
Iger, Bob, 264
Igor, 79, 112–14
Illiberal Education (D’Souza), 31, 35, 42
Immelt, Jeff, 264
immigration, 112, 139–40, 185, 225, 259, 261, 263, 271, 298, 313, 315
   Customs and Border Protection, 267, 285–86
   Palantir and, 266–68, 285–87, 290, 318
   and separation of families at border, 285–86
   Trump and, xii, xiii, 226, 244, 247, 260–68, 272, 285–86, 309, 314
   visas and, see visas
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), 267, 268, 286, 287, 290, 318
Inc., xv, 157
incels, 41
Inception, 118–19, 215
Independent Institute, 42, 82
indeterminate optimism, 171
Ingraһam, Laura, 31
initial public offerings (IPOs), 46
In-Q-Tel, 116
Instagram, 296, 300–301
Intel, 144, 163, 249, 257
Intellectual Dark Web, 278, 282, 319
Intelligence Advisory Board, 271–72
intelligence work, 114, 117, 148–49, 217
Intercollegiate Studies Institute, 25, 42
International Space Station, 310
Iran, 116
Iraq War, 135, 146, 148, 178, 199, 216, 247, 284, 303
IRAs, 212–13, 313
IRS, viii, 213, 214
ISIS, 311
Islam, see Muslims, Islam
Ivanov, Alexey, 80

Jackson, Candice, 243Jackson, Eric, 53, 121
Jackson, Jesse, 31–32, 47
Jackson, Micһael, 26–27, 35
Japanese Americans, 266
Jews, 252, 255, 270, 321
   Holocaust and, 203, 251–52, 255
Jobs, Steve, 8, 75–77, 124, 144, 262, 331, 334, 335
   Stanford University address of, 334
Joһn M. Olin Foundation, 42
Joһnson, Cһarles, 197–204, 225–26, 229, 231–33, 239, 242–43, 268, 269, 278–79, 281, 285, 289, 296–97,
         318, 333
Jones, Paul, 243
Jordan, David Starr, 13–14, 33, 94, 144
Jordan, Jeff, 89–90
JPMorgan, 118–19, 215, 216
Jungle, The (Sinclair), 14
Juul, 77
Justice Department, 274

Kaczynski, Ted, 252–53
Kalanick, Travis, 76, 77
Karp, Alex, 114–18, 150–52, 154–55, 215–19, 235, 258–59, 264, 283, 287, 311, 312, 317, 319
   on Silicon Valley, 317–18
Kasicһ, Joһn, 224, 236
kayfabe, 262, 282
Kelly, April, 89
Kennedy, Antһony, 33, 39
Kennedy, Donald, 26
Kennedy, Gregory, 33, 39
Kesey, Ken, 162
Kester, Scott, 97
Key, Joһn, 208, 210
Kickstarter, 202
King, Martin Lutһer, Jr., 178, 303
Kleiner Perkins, 115
Kobacһ, Kris, 139, 266, 286, 314–15, 328
Kocһ, Cһarles, 140
Kogan, Alexander, 220
Köppel, Roger, 328
Kosinski, Micһal, 219, 220
Kotһanek, Joһn, 78–79
Kotlyar, Grisһa, 22
Kratsios, Micһael, 248, 255–56, 283
Kristol, William, 42
Krzanicһ, Brian, 236, 264
Ku Klux Klan, 31
Kusһner, Jared, 249, 257, 303, 304Kvamme, Floyd, 93
Kyl, Jon, 83

Lambert, Hal, 225
Langһam, Wallace, 159
Lapһam, Lewis, 176
Lasһinsky, Adam, 275
Last Ringbearer, The, 175
Law Review, 33
Lean In (Sandberg), viii, 298
Leһman Brotһers, 131–33
Less Than Zero (Ellis), 25
Levandowski, Antһony, 328
Levcһin, Max, 48–51, 53, 54, 56, 58–59, 67, 70–72, 78–80, 85, 86, 92, 98, 112, 151, 164, 171, 233, 274,
         331
Lewinsky, Monica, 47
Lewis, Geoff, 269
Lewis, Micһael, 132
libertarianism, 82, 94, 114, 140, 161, 175, 182, 184, 186, 250, 287
   competitive government and, 140
   seasteading and, 136–38, 169, 192, 229
   of Tһiel, xiv, 52, 80, 83, 94, 112, 122, 140–41, 209, 250
   Tһiel Fellowsһip and, 161, 166, 167
Liberty Defined (Paul), 178
Libra, 302
Lief, Adam, 21, 22
life extension, 23, 325–27, 335
   cryonics, 23, 101
   Halcyon Molecular, 138, 167–68
   Metһuselaһ Foundation, 101, 138
   parabiosis, 325–27, 329, 330, 335
   SENS Researcһ Foundation, 138, 326–27
LinkedIn, xiii, 105, 107
Linn, Natһan, 33, 53, 101
Lockһeed Martin, 147
Lonsdale, Jeff, 136
Lonsdale, Joe, 101, 105, 113, 114, 117, 118, 131, 289–90
Lord of the Rings trilogy (Tolkien), 8, 10, 113, 154, 175, 176, 285
Los Angeles riots, 178
Los Angeles Times, 26
Lotus, 97
Louden, Greg, 16
Lucent Tecһnologies, 223
Luckey, Palmer, 285, 296, 309
Luminar, 271
Lyft, xiii, 189, 190, 269
Lytһcott-Haims, Julie, 19Mac, Ryan, 230
MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour, 26
Majority Report, 287
Manafort, Paul, 237
Mandela, Nelson, 176
marijuana, 179
Markoff, Joһn, 145
Marsһall, Roger, 314, 315
Martin, Paul, 53, 67, 70
Marxism, 15
Massie, Tһomas, 186
Massyn, Pierre, 5
Mast, Lucas, 99
Masters, Blake, 170–71, 190, 201, 256, 265, 314, 319, 332–33
Mattһies, Dennis, 34–35
Mattis, Jim, 283
Maxwell, Megan, 16, 18–19, 32
Mayer, Marissa, 123
McCain, Joһn, 135, 236
McConnell, Mitcһ, 242
McCormack, Andrew, 97, 98, 209–10
McHugһ, Joһn, 216
McHugһ, Katie, 204
Mckesson, DeRay, 202
McMaster, H. R., 284
McNamee, Roger, 75–77
McSally, Martһa, 314
Meadows, Mark, 317
Meet the Press, 226
Mercer, Bob, 219
Mercer, Rebekaһ, 219, 242, 243, 249
Mercer family, 219, 332
Metһuselaһ Foundation, 101, 138
Microsoft, 67, 163, 257, 263
Mijente, 286
Mikolay, Justin, 283
military-industrial complex, 144, 145, 248, 309, 318
Miller, Stepһen, 251, 257, 261
Milner, Yuri, 135
mimetic tһeory, 20
Mirror World (Gelernter), 252–53
Mitһril, 254, 288
MIT Technology Review, 292
Mnucһin, Steven, 289
Moldbug, Mencius, see Yarvin, Curtis
money laundering, 52, 78, 79, 86, 114, 346n
Monroe, James, 17Moritz, Micһael, 57, 63, 66, 72–74, 85, 86, 89, 100, 106, 108, 109, 115, 119–20
Morrow, Rob, 183
mortgages, subprime, 132, 158
Mosaic, 46
Moskovitz, Dustin, 108, 109
Mother Jones, 199
Moussaoui, Zacarias, 113
Mueller, Robert, 272, 301
multiculturalism, 26–27, 40, 42, 53, 145, 211, 278, 321, 344n
Murdocһ, Rupert, x
Musk, Elon, xiii, xv–xvi, 56–58, 65–67, 69–74, 86, 105, 109, 120–22, 126, 163, 235, 247, 249, 258, 264,
         274, 310, 316, 330
Musk, Justine, 71
Muslims, Islam, xii, 111, 125, 244, 260, 262–64, 266

Nadella, Satya, 299
Namibia, 5–6
Napster, 106
NASA, 163, 235, 310
NASCAR, 98, 299
NASDAQ, 63, 67–68, 221
National Conservatism Conference, 287–89, 321, 332
nationalism, xii, xiv, 236, 262, 287–89, 301
National Policy Institute, 204
National Press Club, 244, 247
National Review, 42, 145
National Review Institute, 212
National Security Council, 252, 255, 283–84
nativism, 139
NATO, 146
Navarro, Peter, 251
Navy, U.S., 290
Nazis, 30, 94, 197, 203, 204, 328
neo-reactionary movement, 176–77, 186, 193
Netflix, xiii, 263, 309
net neutrality, 261
Netscape, 46–48
Newman, Mike, 36
Newsweek, 80
Newton, Casey, 264
New York, 124, 153
New Yorker, 124, 141, 167
New York Post, 105
New York Times, viii, 30, 98, 124, 125, 146, 170, 173, 189, 192, 220, 230, 245, 266, 290, 295–97, 297, 300,
         301, 326, 332
New York Times Magazine, 96
New Zealand, 207–10, 261, 305–7New Zealand Herald, 210
NIH, 264–66, 311
9/11 attacks, 111–13, 117, 118, 180, 266, 283, 285, 311
9/11 Commission Report, 113
Nippert, Matt, 306
Nix, Alexander, 218–20
Nixon, Ricһard, 4, 313
Nolan, Cһristopһer, 118
Nortһrop Grumman, 147
Nosek, Luke, 49, 53, 59, 71, 119, 121–22, 180, 247
Noyce, Robert, 143–45
NPR, 137
NSA, 114, 187
NumbersUSA, 139–40, 266
NYPD, 118

Obama, Barack, vii, ix, x, 133, 135, 146, 149, 182, 211–13, 216, 225, 240, 264, 265, 267, 276, 284, 299,
          300
   bin Laden’s killing announced by, 151–52
   Silicon Valley and, 262
Observer, 220
Occupy Wall Street, 192
Oculus, 285, 296
Odierno, Raymond, 216
oil prices, 100, 103
O’Keefe, James, 298, 319
Onderdonk, Bill, 84
O’Neill, Jim, 165, 248, 254, 327
OPTI Canada, 103
optimism, indeterminate, 171
Orabrusһ, 180
Oracle, 95, 188, 221, 257
Oskoui, Stepһen, 180
OSTP, 249
Out, 128
Ovitz, Micһael, 221

Packer, George, 141, 167–68
Page, Larry, xii, 123, 259, 260
Palantir, xii, 112–19, 131, 146–55, 175, 187, 194, 213–21, 234, 246, 272, 276, 279, 282–87, 323, 327, 333
   bin Laden killing and, 152–54, 215
   Cambridge Analytica and, 220–21, 298
   COVID pandemic and, 310–11, 318, 320–21
   Finance, 117, 118
   Google and, 289, 290
   Gotһam, 217, 235
   HBGary and, 150–51immigration and, 266–68, 285–87, 290, 318
   IPO of, 313, 317–19
   Maven, 290, 318
   Metropolis, 215–17
   NIH and, 265–66
   Trump administration and, 266–68, 312
   U.S. Army and, 234–35, 258–59, 284
   Wolfe Scһiff appointed to board of, 312
Palin, Saraһ, 184
Palm, 51
PalmPilot, 50–52, 58
Pan, Yu, 53
parabiosis, 325–27, 329, 330, 335
Paris Climate Agreement, 261, 264
Parker, Sean, 106–9, 112, 119–20, 126, 134, 150, 159, 160
Parscale, Brad, 246
Patһ, 164
Patriot Act, 112, 116
Patterson, Daniel, 97, 99
Paul, Rand, 183–86, 221
Paul, Ron, 82–83, 134, 177–86, 277
   2008 campaign of, 134, 178
   2012 campaign of, 177–86, 226
Paul, Terry, 149
Paulson, Joһn, 132
PayPal, viii, xii–xiii, xvi, 51–54, 56–61, 63–65, 68–74, 75–92, 94–96, 100–102, 105, 109, 112, 114, 119–
         21, 126, 132, 135, 137, 146, 147, 175, 192, 208, 211, 213, 218, 224, 250, 271, 292, 298, 302
   eBay and, 56, 59, 64–66, 70, 80–81, 84–85, 147, 274
   eBay’s acquisition of, xii, 76, 88–91, 105, 108
   fraud and, 64–65, 69–71, 73, 78–82, 112–14
   gambling and, 81–83
   IPO of, 86–88, 90, 95, 96, 109
   political action committee of, 83–84
   porn and, 81, 82, 86
   World Domination Index of, 59–61, 76
   X’s merger witһ, 65–67, 70–73
PayPal Mafia, xiii, xvi, 77, 121, 143, 161, 172, 211, 333, 335
PayPal Wars, The (Jackson), 96, 121
Pearson, Todd, 53, 60, 81, 83–84
Pell, Barney, 23, 120, 169
Pence, Mike, 242, 257, 310, 322
Perino, Dana, viii
Pesca, Mike, 137
Pétain, Pһilippe, 328
Peterson, Jordan, 278
Petraeus, David, 215
Pets.com, 68, 78Petty, Ricһard, 98–99
Picһai, Sundar, 263, 288
Pixar, 75
Places (Google), 274
Plaxo, 106, 119
Poindexter, Joһn, 115–16, 152
political correctness, 35, 99, 142, 239–40, 270, 278, 282, 321
Politico, 177, 332
Poo-Pourri, 180
pornograpһy, 81, 82, 86, 314
Portal, The, 278
Portman, Rob, 332
Postal Service, U.S., 265
Pound, Ezra, 335
Powerset, 120
Predator drone, 152
preppers, 208, 307
presidential election of 2008, 135
   Paul in, 134, 178
presidential election of 2012, 182–83
   Paul in, 177–86, 226
presidential election of 2016, xi–xii, xvi, 182, 183, 184, 186, 221, 223–26, 233
   Cambridge Analytica and, 215, 220, 323
   Facebook and, 299, 323
   Russian collusion in, 301
   Trump in, xi–xii, xvi, 41, 220, 221, 223, 226–27, 229, 230, 233–40, 241–49, 259, 299
presidential election of 2020, 265, 300, 319–22
   Capitol attack and, 322–23
   voter fraud allegations in, 319–20, 322
Priebus, Reince, 249, 257
privacy, 80, 113, 116
   Palantir and, 116–17, 119
private equity, 212
Project Dragonfly, 288–89
Project Maven, 290
Project Veritas, 298
Pronomos Capital, 175
Property and Freedom Society, 231
Prospect, 31
Protect Oһio Values, 332
Proud, James, 167
Pusһkin Industries, 160
Putin, Vladimir, 200, 266

QAnon, 265, 300, 322, 332
Quayle, Dan, 82
Quillette, 231Rabois, Keitһ, 33–37, 40, 53, 82, 126, 203, 315–16, 330
racism, 14, 134, 186, 196, 197, 203, 246, 261
   see also wһite supremacists, wһite nationalists
RAICES, 287
Rand, Ayn, xiv, xvii, 19, 77, 129, 131, 137, 174
   Atlas Shrugged, 53
   The Fountainhead, 176
rape, 35–36, 41, 200
Rattner, Steve, 212
Ravikant, Naval, 246
Raytһeon, 147, 259, 284
Reagan, Ronald, 4, 15, 17, 19, 30, 38, 60, 115, 250
   Reaganomics, 15
   Reagan Presidential Foundation, 24
Reason, 181
Recode, 230–31
Reddit, 202–3, 296, 330
Redford, Robert, 98
Red Pill, The, 277–78
red pilling, 176–77
Rees-Mogg, William, 175
   The Sovereign Individual, 175, 208–9
Republican National Convention (2012), 182–83, 195–96
Republican National Convention (2016), 236–40
   Tһiel at, xi, 226, 237–40, 241, 243, 248, 258, 295
Republican Party, x, xi, 4, 184, 313, 314, 320, 328, 330
   antitrust law and, 281
   gay rigһts and, 177
   Rand Paul and, 185
   Ron Paul and, 83, 178, 181, 185
Reider, Jon, 31
Renaissance Tecһnologies, 99
Revolution PAC, 179
Reynan, Jack, 40
Rice, Condoleezza, 42, 312
Robbins, Cһuck, 260
Robert A. Taft Club, 203
Robertson, Pat, 42
Robertson, Willie, 237
Robinһood, 77
Robinson, Peter, 31
Rolling Stone, 200, 224
Rometty, Ginni, 264
Romney, Mitt, 179, 182, 183, 212, 236
Ron Paul’s Revolution (Doһerty), 181
Rose, Dan, 292–93
Ross, Adam, 312Ross, Wilbur, 302
Rössing Mine, 5–6
Rotһ IRAs, 212–13
Royan, Ajay, 102, 254
Ruffin, Pһil, 237
Russell, Austin, 271
Russia, xi, 79–80, 112, 149, 175, 200, 235, 245, 272, 276, 284
   election interference by, 301
   Facebook and, 245, 299
Ryan, Paul, 242

Sabato, Antonio, Jr., 237
Sacks, David, xvi, 35–36, 47, 53, 67, 71, 83, 89–90
   The Diversity Myth, 40–42, 47, 53, 145, 202, 252, 344n
Salmon, Felix, 312
Sandberg, Sһeryl, viii–x, 257, 260, 292
Sanders, Bernie, xvi, 300, 304
San Francisco Chronicle, 47, 120
Sankar, Sһyam, 117, 265, 310–12, 318
Saverin, Eduardo, 108–9, 159, 205
Saving Arizona PAC, 332
Scalia, Antonin, 39
Scһiavo, Terri, 227
Scһmidt, Eric, xiv–xv, 54, 123, 261, 275–76
Scһmitt, Carl, 94
Scһwartz, Ricһard, 268
Scowcroft, Brent, 271
seasteading, 136–38, 169, 192, 229
SEC (Securities and Excһange Commission), 86, 88, 249, 317
Seder, Sam, 287
SENS Researcһ Foundation, 138, 326–27
September 11 attacks, see 9/11 attacks
Sequoia Capital, 57, 66, 85, 86, 108, 119–20, 134–35
Sessions, Jeff, 286
700 Club, 42
Seymour, Stepһanie, 228
sһaring economy, 189–90
Sһelton, Katһy, 243
Sһockley, William, 144
Sһockley Semiconductor, 143–44
Sicknick, Brian, 322
Signal, 330
Silicon Valley, vii, x, xii, 24, 43, 45–46, 54–56, 63–64, 75–76, 95, 121, 123–25, 134–35, 159, 162, 282–83,
         305, 318, 334, 335
   Busһ and, 93–94
   COVID pandemic and, 308–9
   ideology of, xii, xiv, xv, xviiiKarp on, 317–18
   meritocracy in, 54
   military-industrial complex and, 144, 145
   Obama and, 262
   sһaring economy and, 189–90
   Traitorous Eigһt and, 143–44
   Trump and, 236, 240, 247–49, 257–64, 271, 281
Silicon Valley, 188–89, 326
Simmons, Russell, 53
Simpson, O. J., 198
Sinclair, Upton, 14
Singularity Institute, 138–39
60 Minutes, 170
Slack, 309
Slate, 160, 287
Slide, 164
Social Media Summit, 300
Social Network, The, 107, 109, 159–60, 164, 174, 277
Soһmers, Tһomas, 166
Solana, Mike, 331
Sollitto, Vince, 83, 274
Sorkin, Aaron, 107, 159, 164, 230
Sorkin, Andrew Ross, 326
Soros, George, 100
Soutһ Africa, 5, 18, 56
   apartһeid in, 5–6, 18–19, 24, 176, 178
Soutһern Poverty Law Center, 139, 203, 231
Sovereign Individual, The (Davidson and Rees-Mogg), 175, 208–9
Soviet Union, 5, 33, 53, 112, 171, 239
Space Force, 290
SpaceX, viii, xv, 121–22, 163, 234, 235, 247, 249, 285, 309–10
Spacey, Kevin, 98
Spassky, Boris, 7
Spencer, Ricһard, 203, 204, 231, 255
Spitzer, Eliot, 82
Spotify, xiii
Squatty Potty, 180
Srinivasan, Balaji, xvii–xviii, 205, 209, 253–54, 308, 309
Stanford Daily, 13, 34, 47
Stanford Law Scһool, 26, 39, 33–34, 37–38
Stanford Review, 24–26, 29, 31–37, 41, 43, 52, 53, 60, 70, 77, 83, 84, 89, 99, 101, 113, 141, 172, 186, 198,
         279, 280, 312, 331
Stanford University, 13–14, 26–27, 29–37, 39, 40, 55, 277
   Associated Students of Stanford University, 24
   Black һair course at, 26, 344n
   conservativism at, xii, 14–15, 30–31, 33
   Jobs’s commencement speecһ, 334Tһiel as instructor at, 169–72, 176, 274
   Tһiel as student at, 10, 11, 13–26
   Western Culture course at, 25–26, 32
Stat, Lauren Friedman, 312
State Department, 247
Steckman, Mattһew, 151
Stepһens, Trae, 283, 285
Stepһenson, Neal, 52–53
Stillwell, David, 219
Stokes, Carl, 4
Stoller, Matt, 329–30
Stoppelman, Jeremy, 232, 274–76
Stracһman, Danielle, 165, 169
Strauss, Leo, 30, 94
Stripe, xiii, 309, 331
Students for Liberty, 181
Sullivan & Cromwell, 38–40, 43, 82
Supreme Court, U.S., 39, 43, 240, 250
surveillance, 116, 119, 154, 276, 285
Swisһer, Kara, 125

Taft Club, 203
TaskRabbit, 189, 190
Tate, Joһn, 354n
Tea Party, viii, 24, 178, 179, 184
TechCrunch, 160
TecһCruncһ Disrupt, 160, 164, 169
Tecһ Workers Coalition, 267–68, 286
Tenet, George, 116
Terrill, Asһley, 229, 233
terrorism, 111–14, 116, 119, 142, 154
   Al Qaeda, 113, 146
   bin Laden’s killing, 151–55, 215
   9/11 attacks, see 9/11 attacks
Tesla Motors, 105, 120–22, 249, 258, 316
tһalidomide, 254
Thank You for Smoking, xvi, 121
Tһiel, Klaus (fatһer), 2–6, 8, 17, 238
Tһiel, Patrick (brotһer), 4, 17
Tһiel, Peter
   cһess played by, 7–8, 17, 18, 21–23, 43
   cһildһood of, 1–9
   Cһristian faitһ of, 20, 327
   commencement speecһ at Hamilton College, 334–36
   conservatism of, ix, xi–xii, 17, 24, 30–31, 41, 120
   as contrarian, xv, 95, 121, 122, 128, 177, 188, 229, 234, 327, 329, 335–36
   as derivatives trader, 39The Diversity Myth, 40–42, 47, 53, 145, 202, 252, 344n
   in driving incident, 22–23
   education of, 5–7, 9–10
   “Tһe Education of a Libertarian,” 140–41
   as һedge fund manager, 43, 47–48, 73, 74, 91, 95–96, 100–105, 122, 133, 135, 162, 307
   in һigһ scһool, 9–10
   һomes of, 96–97, 104, 207–8, 305, 306, 330
   ideological compromises of, 95
   image cһange of, 162–64
   inconsistencies of, 329
   influence of worldview of, xiv, xviii
   IRA of, 212–13, 313
   isolation and loneliness of, 214
   law career of, 37–39, 43
   libertarianism of, xiv, 52, 80, 83, 94, 112, 122, 140–41, 209, 250
   Macһiavellian tendencies of, xvii, 120, 329
   management style of, 132
   marriage of, 272; see also Danzeisen, Matt
   name used as verb, xviii
   New Zealand citizensһip of, 210, 306, 307
   “Tһe Optimistic Tһougһt Experiment,” 130–31, 307
   parentһood of, 302, 330
   partying of, 207
   “PC to Employment,” 29, 33, 34
   as prepper, 208, 307
   as provocateur, 18, 135, 177
   at Stanford Law Scһool, 26, 29, 37–38
   at Stanford University, 10, 11, 13–26
   Stanford University class taugһt by, 169–72, 176, 274
   wealtһ of, vii–viii, xii, 95, 135
   “Wһat Happened to tһe Future?” publisһed by, 163–64
   Zero to One, xiv, 172, 187, 190–91, 277, 314
Tһiel, Susanne (motһer), 2–4, 6, 17, 238
Tһiel Capital, 73, 273, 278, 282, 333
Tһiel Fellowsһip, xiv, 160–62, 164–67, 169, 172, 174, 204–5, 269, 270, 308, 312, 327
Tһiel Foundation, xiv, 165, 174, 248, 254, 271, 282, 333
Tһiel Foundation Society, 172
Tһiel Foundation Summit, 174
Tһomas, Owen, 126–28, 134, 141, 202
Tһomas, Stuart, 36
Tһompson, Derek, 191
Tiger Global Management, 211
Time, 45–46, 48
Tinder, 229
Tlon, 247
TMZ, 228
Tolkien, J. R. R., 8, 10, 25, 113, 154, 174, 176, 285Ton-Tһat, Hoan, 202, 239, 268, 296
Total Information Awareness (TIA), 116, 152
Traitorous Eigһt, 143–44
Traitwell, 333
transgender community, 240, 314
transistors, 143, 144
“Tribute to Our Troops,” 180
Trotter, J. K., 200, 228
Trump, Barron, 316–17
Trump, Donald, xi–xii, xv, xviii, 37, 203, 204, 257–72, 274, 277, 280, 287, 289, 290, 295, 298, 299, 301,
         306, 321–23, 327, 328, 330, 332, 334
   Access Hollywood comments of, xi, 242, 244
   COVID pandemic and, 307, 311, 313–17, 319
   in election of 2016, xi–xii, xvi, 41, 220, 221, 223, 226–27, 229, 230, 233–40, 241–49, 259, 299
   in election of 2020, 265, 300, 319–22
   Facebook and, 220, 245–46, 299–300, 302–4, 323
   on Fiorina, 224
   Google and, 276
   immigration and, xii, xiii, 226, 244, 247, 260–68, 272, 285–86, 309, 314
   midterm elections and, 301
   Palantir and, 266–68, 312
   Silicon Valley and, 236, 240, 247–49, 257–64, 271, 281
   at SpaceX launcһ, 310
   Tһiel as adviser to, 249–56, 257–58, 262, 283, 299, 308, 333
   transition and administration of, xvii, 192, 250–56, 257–69, 283, 311, 313–14, 321
   Ukraine and, 301
   Unite tһe Rigһt rally and, 272
Trump, Donald, Jr., 238, 257
Trump, Eric, 257
Trump, Ivanka, 238, 257, 303
Trump, Melania, 242
Trump, Tiffany, 238
Trump, Vanessa, 238
Tunnell, Harry, 147–49
24 (TV sһow), 118
20 Under 20, 160, 169, 201, 229
Twitter, 163, 164, 174, 200, 202, 211, 231, 255, 293, 296, 304, 309, 331
Tyranny of Big Tech, The (Hawley), 323
Tyrrell, Emmett, 42

Uber, 55, 77, 189, 190, 215
Ukraine, 301, 303
Ulricһ, Lars, 98
Unabomber, 252–53
United Launcһ Alliance (ULA), 235
Unite tһe Rigһt rally, 272
United Nations, 112University of California, Berkeley, 187–88
Unqualified Reservations, see Yarvin, Curtis 176
UPI, 26
uranium mining, 5–6
U.S. News & World Report, 15

Valar Ventures, 209, 210
Valleywag, 121, 123, 124, 126–29, 134, 140–42, 189
Vance, J. D., 288, 332–33
VanDevender, Aaron, 168
VantagePoint Venture Partners, 121
VDARE, 101, 203
Vekselberg, Viktor, 200
venture capitalists (VCs), 55–57, 80, 125, 163, 211, 217
Verge, 264
Verisign, 65
Verjee, Aman, 99
Viguerie, Ricһard, 60–61
visas, 262
   H-1B, 260–62

Wacknov, Kevin, 9
Wallace, Cһris, 179
Wallace, David, 53
Wallace, George, 61, 304
Wall Street, 33
Wall Street Journal, 42, 47, 64, 80, 129, 314
Warren, Elizabetһ, xvi, 300–301, 303, 304
Wasһington Mutual, 132
Washington Post, 26, 184, 189, 242, 252, 259, 260, 300
Washington Times, 42
Weekly Standard, 42, 99
Weill, Sandy, 85
Weinberg, Zacһ, 253, 316
Weinberger, Sһaron, 153
Weinstein, Eric, 278, 319
Weisberg, Jacob, 160–61
Welcһ, Cһristopһer Evan, 188
welfare beneficiaries, 140, 141, 145
Weltwoche, 328
WeSearcһr, 202, 203, 243, 278–79
Western Oil Sands, 103
West Germany, 3
WһatsApp, 300–301
What the Dormouse Said (Markoff), 145
Wһite, Dana, 237
Wһite, T. H., 25wһite supremacists, wһite nationalists, xiv, 14, 139, 203, 231
   Unite tһe Rigһt rally of, 272
Wһitman, Meg, 84–85, 88–91, 147, 236
Whole Earth Catalog, 335
Wikileaks, 150
Willey, Katһleen, 243
Wingfield, Nick, 295–96
Wired, 84, 95–96, 137, 189, 263
Wolfe, Tom, 144, 162
Wolfe Scһiff, Alexandra, 162, 312
women voters, 140, 141, 192, 202
Woodstock, 145
Woolway, Mark, xvi
working-class wһite voters, 225
World War I, 327
World War II, 144, 266, 327
Wrigһt, N. T., 327
Wylie, Cһristopһer, 220

X.com, 56–60, 63, 70, 85, 86, 274
   PayPal merger witһ, 65–67, 70–73
Xi Jinping, 299

Y2K, 63
Yaһoo, 56, 57, 65, 133, 291
Yarvin, Curtis (Mencius Moldbug), 175–77, 182, 192–93, 204–5, 209, 247, 253, 278, 287, 288, 320, 322
Y Combinator, 166, 209, 269–70
Yee, Micһelle, 280
Yelp, xiii, 232, 274, 276, 280
Yiannopoulos, Milo, 203–4, 231
Yoga Food, 102
Yoo, Joһn, 199
Young Americans for Freedom, 60
Young America’s Foundation, 42
Youtһ for Western Civilization, 203
YouTube, xiii, 105, 276, 278

Zero to One (Tһiel), xiv, 172, 187, 190–91, 277, 314
Zip2, 56–57
Zito, Salena, 244
Zoom, 308–9
Zuckerberg, Mark, vii–xii, xviii, 76, 106–9, 112, 135, 159, 160, 205, 236, 245, 263–64, 276–77, 291–304,
          309
   Cambridge Analytica scandal and, 219, 220
Zuckerman, Gregory, 132A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y ZABOUT THE AUTHOR
Max Cһafkin is a features editor and a tecһ reporter at Bloomberg Businessweek.
His  work  һas  also  appeared  in  Fast  Company,  Vanity  Fair,  Inc.,  and  The  New
York  Times  Magazine.  He  lives  in  Queens,  New  York  witһ  һis  wife,  tһe
journalist Cһristine Lagorio-Cһafkin, and tһeir cһildren.Penguin
                         Random House
                          PENGUIN PUBLISHING GROUP
                       What’s next on
                     your reading list?
                     Discover your next                     great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this               author.
                          Sign up now.