Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer People
Full text of "Atlas Shrugged"
See other formats

«T \ 




'V 




■ USd 


rngjy 


Published by New ‘Amendatf 1 ibrafy, aiditte^qp 
Penguin Putnam Inc , 375 Hudson Street, 

New York, New York 10014, USA 
Penguin Books Ltd, 27 Wrights Lane, 

London W8 5TZ, England 

Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Rmgwood, 

Victoria, Australia 

Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue 
Toronto, Ontano Canada M4V 3B2 
Penguin Books (N Z ) Ltd, 182 190 Wairau Road, 
Auckland 10, New Zedand 


■flL.fcffi 1 0 


Penguin Books I td. Registered Offices 
Harmondsworth Middlesex F ngland 

Published by Signet, an imprint of New American Library, 
a division of Penguin Putnam Inc 

18 17 lb 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 


Information about other books by Ayn Rand and her philosophy Objectivism 
may be obtained by writing to OBJECTIVISM Box 17/ Murray Hill Station 
New York New York 10157 LSA 




RfcGlSTFRtO fRADl MARK 


MARC \ Rt^SIRADA 


Printed in the United States of Amenta 


PUBLISHER’S NOTr 

This is a work of fiction Names characters, places, and incidents either are 
the product of the author's imagination or art used fu tihouslv and any resem- 
blance to actual persons, living or dead business establishments, events or 
locales is entirely coincidental 

BOOKS ARE AVAllABt* AT Ql AMTny WHFN i. SI D 10 PROMOTf 

PRODUCTS OR MRVKFS f OR INFORMATION PI l ASF WRIIF IX) PRI NflUM MARKF T 
ING DIVISION PPNGOIN PUTNAM INC 375 HUDSON STRFtf Nl p >ORK NPW 
YORK 10014 



To Frank O’Connor 




CONTENTS 


Introduction to the 35th Anniversary Edition 1 

by Leonard Pci k off 


PART ONE 

NON-CONTRADICTION 

1 THE THEME It 

U THE CHAIN 33 

III THE IOP AND THE BOTTOM 48 

IV THE IMMOVABLE MOVERS 66 

V THE (UMAX OF HIE D’ANCOMAS 88 

VI T HE NON COMMERCIAL 122 

VII THE EXPLOIT HRS AND TT IE EXPLOITED 154 

VIII THE JOHN GALT LINE 203 

IX THE SACRED AND THE PROFANE 237 

X WYATT’S TORC H 273 


PART TWO 

EITHER-OR 

I THE MAN WHO BELONGED ON EARTH 315 

II THE ARISTOCRACY OF PULL 352 

III WHITE BLACKMAIL 392 

IV THE SAN<TiON OF THE VICTIM 427 

V ACCOUNT OVERDRAWN 458 



VI MIRACLE METAL. 491 

VII THE MORATORIUM ON BRAINS 523 

VIII BY OUR LOVE 560 

IX 1 1 IE FACE WITHOUT PAIN OR FEAR 582 

OR OU1L T 

X THE SIGN OF THE DOLLAR 601 

PART THREE 

A IS A 

I ATLANTIS 6*0 

II THE UTOPIA OF CREED 689 

HI ANTI-GREED 747 

IV AN TELIFE 791 

V THEIR BROTHERS’ KEEPERS 831 

VI THE CONCERTO OF DELIVERANCE 881 

VII “THIS IS JOHN GALT SPEAKING” 915 

VIII THE EGOIST 979 

IX THE GENERATOR 1030 

X IN THE NAME OF THE BEST WITHIN US 1049 

ABOUT THE AUTHOR 1070 

READER’S GUIDE 1071 



INTRODUCTION TO 
THE 35TH ANNIVERSARY EDITION 


Ayn Rand held that art is a “re-creation of reality according to an 
artist’s metaphysical value judgments.” By its nature, therefore, a 
novel (like a statue or a symphony) docs not require or tolerate 
an explanatory preface; it is a self-contained universe, aloof from 
commentary, beckoning the reader to enter, perceive, respond. 

Ayn Rand would never have approved of a didactic (or laudatory) 
introduction to her book, and I have no intention of tlouting her 
wishes. Instead, I am going to give her the floor. I am going to let 
you in on some of the thinking she did as she was preparing to write 
Adas Shrugged. 

Before starting a novel, Ayn Rand wrote voluminously in her jour- 
nals about its theme, plot, and characters. She wrote not for any 
audience, but strictly for herself — that is, tor the clarity of her own 
understanding. The journals dealing with Atlas Shrugged are power- 
ful examples of her mind in action, confident even when groping, 
purposeful even when stymied, luminously eloquent even though 
wholly unedited. These journals are also a fascinating record of the 
step-by-step birth of an immortal work of art. 

In due course, ail of Ayn Rand’s writings will be published For 
this 35th anniversary edition of Adas Shrugged , however, I have se- 
lected, as a kind of advance bonus for her fans, four typical journal 
entries. Let me warn new readers that the passages reveal the plot 
and will spoil the tnxik for anyone who reads them before knowing 
the story. 

As I recall “Atlas Shrugged’' did not become the novel’s title 
until Miss Rand’s husband made the suggestion in 1956. The working 
title throughout the writing was “The Strike:” 

The earliest of Miss Rand’s notes for “The Strike” are dated Janu- 
ary 1, 1945, about a year after the publication ot The Fountainhead l 
Naturally enough, the subject on her mind was how to differentiate 
the present novel from its predecessor. 


Theme. What happens to the world when the Prime Movers 
go on strike. 

This means — a picture of the world with its motor cut off. 
Show: what, how, why. The specific steps and incidents— in 
terms of persons, their spirits, motives, psychology and ac- 


l 



Hons — and, secondarily, proceeding from persons, in terms of 
history, society and the world. 

The theme requires: to show who are the prime movers and 
why, how they function. Who are their enemies and why, 
what are the motives behind the hatred for and the enslave- 
ment of the prime movers; the nature of the obstacles placed 
in their way, and the reasons for it. 

This last paragraph is contained entirely in The Fountain - 
head . Roark ana Toohey are the complete statement of it. 
Therefore, this is not the direct theme or The Strike — but it is 
part of the theme and must be kept in mind, stated again 
(though briefly) to have the theme clear and complete. 

First question to decide is on whom the emphasis must be 
placed — on the prime movers, the parasites or the world. The 
answer is: The world . The story must be primarily a picture of 
the whole. 

In this sense, The Strike is to be much more a "social" 
novel than The Fountainhead . The Fountainhead was about 
"individualism and collectivism within man's soul"; it showed 
the nature and function of the creator and the second-hander. 
The primary concern there was with Roark and Toohey — show- 
ing w hot they are. The rest of the characters were variations 
or the theme of the relation of the ego to others — mixtures of 
the two extremes, the two poles: Roark and Toohey. The pri- 
mary concern of the story was the characters, the people as 
such — their natures. Their relations to each other — which is 
society, men in relation to men— were secondary, an unavoid- 
able, direct consequence of Roark set against Toohey. But it 
was not. the theme. 

Now, it is this relation that must be the theme. Therefore, 
the personal becomes secondary. That is, the personal is nec- 
essary only to the extent needed to make the relationships 
clear. 'In The Fountainhead 1 showed that Roark moves the 
world — that the Keatings feed upon him and hate him for it, 
while the Tooheys are out consciously to destroy him. But the 
theme was Roark — not Roark's relation to the world. Now it 
wifi be the relation. 

In other words, I must show in what concrete, specific way 
the world is moved by the creators. Exactly how do the second- 
handers live on the creators. Both in spiritual matters— and 
(most particularly) in concrete, physical events. (Concentrate 
on the concrete, physical events — but don't fonget to keep in 
mind at all Hmes how the physical proceeds from the 
spiritual) ... 

However, for the purpose of this story. I do not start by 
showing how the second-handers live on the prime movers in 
actual, everyday reality — nor do I start by showing a normal 
world. (That comes in only in necessary retrospect, or flash- 
back, or by implication in the events themselves.) I start with 
the fantastic premise of the prime movers Going on strike . This 
is the actual heart and center of the novel A qisHnction care- 

2 



fully to be observed here: I do not set out to glorify the prime 
mover (that was The Fountainhead }. I set out to show how 
desperately the world needs prime movers, and how viciously 
it treats them. And I show it on a hypothetical case — what 
happens to the world without them . 

In The Fountainhead I did not show how desperately the 
world needed Roark — except by implication. I dia show how 
viciously the world treated him, and why. I showed mainly 
what he is . It was Roark's story. This must be the world $ 
story — in relation to its prime movers. (Almost— the story of a 
body in relation to its heart — a body dying of anemia.) 

I don't show directly what the prime movers do — that's 
shown only by implication. I show what happens when they 
don't do it. (Through that, you see the picture of what they 
do, their place ana their role.) (This is an important guide for 
the construction of the story.) 

In order to work out the story, Ayn Rand had to understand fully 
why the prime movers allowed the second-handers to live on them — 
why the creators had not gone on strike throughout history — what 
errors even the best of them made that kept them in thrall to the 
worst. Part of the answer is dramatized in the character of Dagny 
Taggart, the railroad heiress who declares war on the strikers. Here 
is a note on her psychology, dated April 18, 1946: 


Her error — and the cause of her refusal to join the strike — 
is over-optimism and over-confidence (particularly this last). 

Over-optimism — in that she thinks men are better than they 
are, she doesn't really understand them and is generous 
about it. 

Over-confidence — in that she thinks she can do more than 
an individual actually can. She thinks she can run a railroad 
(or the world) single-handed, she can make people do what 
she wants or needs what is right, by the sheer force of her 
own talent; not by forcina them, of course, not by enslaving 
them and giving orders— but by the sheer over-abundance or 
her own energy- she will show them how, she can teach them 
and persuade them, she is so able that they'll catch it from 
her, (This is still faith in their rationality, in the omnipotence 
of reason. The mistake? Reason is not automatic. Those who 


deny it cannot be conquered by it. Do not count on them. 
Leave them alone.) 

On these two points, Dagny is committing an important (but 
excusable and understandable) error in thinking, the kind of 
error individualists and creators often make. It is an error pro- 
ceeding from the best in their nature and from a proper prind- 
\ but this principle is misapplied. ... 

The error t$ this: it is proper for a creator to be optimistic, 


in the deepest, most basic sense, since the creator believes in 
a benevolent universe and functions on that premise. But it is 
an error to extend that optimism to other specific men. First, 


3 


it's not necessary, the creator's life and the nature of the uni- 
verse do not require it, his life does not depend on others. 
Second, man is a being with free will; therefore, each man is 
potentially good or evil, and it's up to him and only to him 
[through his reasoning mind) to decide which he wants to be. 
The division will affect only him; it is not (and cannot and 
should not be) the primary concern of any other human being. 

Therefore, while a creator does ana must worship Man 
(which means his own highest potentiality; which is his natural 
self-reverence), he must not make the mistake of thinking that 
this means the necessity to worship Mankind (as a collective). 
These are two entirely different conceptions, with entirely — (im- 
mensely and diametrically opposed)— different consequences. 

Man, at his highest potentiality, is realized and fulfilled 
within each creator himself. . . .whether the creator is alone, 
or finds only a handful of others like him, or is among the 
majority of mankind, is of no importance or consequence what- 
ever; numbers have nothing to do with it. He alone or he and 
a few others like him are mankind, in the proper sense of 
being the proof of what man actually is, man at his best, the 
essential man, man at his highest possibility. (The rational 
being, who acts according to nis nature.) 

It should not matter to a creator whether anyone or a million 
or all the men around him fall short of the ideal of Man; let 
him live up to that ideal himself; this is all the "optimism" 
about Man that he needs. But this is a hard and subtle thing 
to realize — and it would be natural for Dagny always to make 
the mistake of believing others are better man they really are 
(or will become better, or she will teach them to become better 
or, actually, she so desperately wants them to be better) — and 
to be tied to the world by that hope 

It is proper for a creator to have an unlimited confidence in 
himself qnd his ability, to feel certain that he can get anything 
he wishes out of life, that he can accomplish anything he 
decides to accomplish, and that it's up to him to ao it. (He 
feels it because he is a man of reason . , .) [But] here is what 
he must keep clearly in mind: it is true that a creator can 
accomplish anything he wishes — if he functions according to 
the nature of man, the universe and his own proper morality, 
that is, if he does not place his wish primarily within others 
and does not attempt or desire anything that is of a collective 
nature, anything that concerns others primarily or requires pri- 
marily the exercise of the will of others. (This ^ould be an 
immoral desire or attempt, contrary to his nature a creator.) 
If he attempts that, he is out of a creator's province and in 
that of the collectivist and the second-hander. 

Therefore, he must never feel confident that h4 can do any- 
thing whatever to, by or through others, (He cjbn't — and he 
shouldn't even wish to try it — and the mere qttempt is im- 
proper.) He must not think that he can , . . somihow transfer 
ms energy and his intelligence to th$m and mal^e them fit for 

4 



his purposes in that way. He must face other men as they 
are, recognizing them as essentially independent entities, by 
nature, and beyond his primary influence; [he must] deal with 
them only on his own, independent terms, deal with such as 
he judges can fit his purpose or live up to his standards jby 
themselves and of their own will, independently of him) ana 
expect nothing from the others. ... 

Now, in Dagny's case, her desperate desire is to run Tag- 
gart Transcontinental. She sees that there are no men suited 
to her purpose around her no men of ability, independence 
and competence. She thinks she can run it with others, with 
the incompetent and the parasites, either bv training them or 
merely by treating them as robots who will take her orders 
and function without personal initiative or responsibility; with 
herself ; in effect , being the spark of initiative , the bearer of 
responsibility for a whole collective. This can't be done. This 
is ner crucial error. 

This is where she fails. 

Ayn Rand's basic purpose as a novelist was to present not villains 
or even heioes with errors, but the ideal man- -the consistent, the 
lully integrated, the perfect. In Atlas Shrugged, this is John Galt, the 
towering figure who moves the world and the novel, yet does not 
appear onstage until Part III By his nature land that of the story') 
Galt is necessarily central to the lives ot all the chaiacters In one 
note, “Galt's relation to the others,” dated June 27, 1946, Miss Rand 
defines succinctly what Galt represents to each oi them: 

For Dogny — the ideal. The answer to her two quests: the 
man of genius and the man she loves. The first quest is ex- 
pressed in her search for the inventor of the engine. The sec- 
ond — her growing conviction that she will never be in love . . . 

For Rearden — the friend. The kind of understanding and ap- 
preciation he has always wanted and did not know he wanted 
lor he thought he had it — he tried to find it in those around 
nim, to get it from his wife, his mother, brother and sister). 

For Francisco d'Anconia — the aristocrat. The only man who 
represents a challenge and a stimulant — almost the "proper 
kind" of audience, worthy of stunning for the sheer joy and 
color of life. 

For Danneskjdld — the anchor. The only man who represents 
land and roots to a restless, reckless wanderer, like tne goal 
of a struggle, the port at the end of a fierce sea-voyage — the 
only man ne can respect. 

For the Composer— Ahe inspiration and the perfect audience. 

For the Philosopher— the embodiment of his abstractions. 

For Father Amadeus — the source of his conflict. The uneasy 
realization that Galt is the end of his endeavors, the man of 
virtue, the perfect man — and that his means do not fit this end 
(and that he is destroying this, his ideal, for the sake of those 
who are evil). 


5 



To James Taggort-~*he eternal threat. The secret dread. The 
reproach. The guilt (his own guilt). He has no specific tie-, 
in with GalF— but he has that constant, causeless, unnamed, 
hysterical fear. And he recognizes it when he hears Galt's 
broadcast and when he sees Galt in person for the first time. 

To the Professor — his conscience. The reproach and re- 
minder. The ghost that haunts him through everything he does, 
without a moment's peace. The thing that says: "No" to his 
whole life. 

Some notes on the above: Rearden s sister, Stacy, was a minor 
character later cut from the novel. 

“Francisco” was spelled ‘‘Francesco” in these early years, while 
Danneskjtild's first name at this point was Ivar, presumably after 
Ivar Kreuger, the Swedish “match king,” who was the real-life model 
of Bjorn Faulkner in Night of January 1 6th 

Father Amadeus was Taggart’s priest, to whom he confessed his 
sms. The priest was supposed to be a positive character, honestly 
devoted to the good but practicing consistently the morality of 
mercy. Miss Rand dropped him, she told me, when she lound that 
it was impossible to make such a character convincing. 

The Professor is Robert Stadler 

This brings me to a final excerpt. Because of her passion tor ideas, 
Miss Rand w'as often asked whether she was primarily a philosopher 
or a novelist. In later years, she was impatient with this question, 
but she gave her own answer, to and lor herselt, m a note dated 
May 4, 1046. The broader context was a discussion of the nature 
of crcativit). 

I seem to be both a theoretical philosopher and a fiction 
writer. But it is the last that interests me most; the first is only 
the means to the last; the absolutely necessary means, but only 
the means; the fiction story is the end. Without an understanding 
and statement of the right philosophical principle, I cannot create 
the right story; but the discovery of the principle interests rne 
only as the discovery of the proper knowledge to be used for 
my life purpose; and my life purpose is the creation of the 
kind of world (people and events) that I like — that is, that 
represents human perfection. 

Philosophical knowledge is necessary in order to define 
human perfection. But I ao not care to stop at the definition, 

I want to use it, to apply it — in my work (in my personal life, 
too — but the core, center and purpose of my personal life, of 
my whole life, is mv work). 

I bis is why, I think, the idea of writing a philpsophical non- 
fiction book bored me. In such a book, the purpose would 
actually be to teach others, to present my idea to them. In a 
book of fiction the purpose is to create, for ntyself, the kind 
of world I want and to live in it while I am creating it; then, 
as a secondary consequence, to let others er|oy mis world, 
If, and to the extent that they can. 

6 



It may be said that the first purpose of a philosophical book 
is the clarification or statement of your new knowledge to and 
for yourself; and then, as a secondary step, the offering of 
your knowledge to others. But here is the difference, as far as 
( am concerned: I have to acquire and state to myself the new 
philosophical knowledge or principle I used in order to wrile 
a fiction story as its embodiment and illustration; I do not core 
to write a story on a theme or thesis of old knowledge, knowl* 
edge stated or discovered by someone else, that is, someone 
else's philosophy (because those philosophies are wrong). To 
this extent, I am an abstract philosopher (I want to present the 
perfect man and his perfect life — and I must also discover my 
own philosophical statement and definition of this perfection). 

But when and if I have discovered such new knowledge, I 
am not interested in stating it in its abstract, general form, that 
is, as knowledge. I am interested in using it, in applying it — 
that is, in stating it in the concrete form of men and events, 
in the form of a tiction story. This last is my final purpose, my 
end; the philosophical knowledge or discovery is only the 
means to it.- For my purpose, the non-fiction form of abstract 
knowledge doesn't interest me; the final, applied form of fic- 
tion, of story, does. (I state the knowledge to myself, anyway; 
but I choose the final form of it, the expression, in the com- 
pleted cycle that leads back to man.) 

I wonder to what extent I represent a peculiar phenomenon 
in this respect. I think I represent the proper integration of a 
complete human being Anyway, this should be my lead for 
the character of John Galt. He, too , is a combination of an 
abstract philosopher and a practical inventor; the thinker and 
the man of action together . . 

In learning, we draw an abstraction from concrete objects 
and events. In creating, we make our own concrete objects 
and events out of the abstraction; we bring the abstraction 
down and back to its specific meaning, to me concrete; but 
the abstraction has helped us to make the kind of concrete 
we want the concrete to be. It has helped us to create — to re- 
shape the world as we wish it to be for our purposes. 

1 cannot resist quoting one further paragraph. It comes a few pages 
later in the same discussion. 

Incidentally, as a sideline observation, if creative fiction writ- 
ing is a process of translating an abstraction into the concrete, 
there are three possible grades of such writing: translating an 
old (known) abstraction (theme or thesis) through the medium 
of old fiction means (that is, characters, events or situations 
used before for that same purpose, that same translation) — 
this is most of the popular trash; translating an old abstraction 
through new, original fiction means — this is most of the good 
literature; creating a new, original abstraction and translating it 
through new, original means. This, as far as I know, is only me — 

7 



my kind of fiction writing May God forgive me (Metaphor*) if 
this is mistaken conceit* As near as I can now see it. it isn't, (A 
fourth possibility — translating!, a new abstraction through old 
means — is impossible, by definition if the abstraction is new, 
there can be no means used by anybody else before to trans- 
late it ) 

is her conclusion “mistaken conceit'* It is now torty-livo years 
since she wrote this note* and you are hoidtm* A\n Rand s master- 
work m vour hands 

You decide 


8 



PARI ONE 





Chapter I THE THEME 

“Who is John Galt?” 

The light was ebbing, and hddie Willers could not distinguish the 
bum’s face. The bum had said it simply, without expression. But 
from the sunset far at the end ol the street, \ellow glints caught his 
eyes, and the eyes looked straight at Eddie Willers. mocking and 
still — as if the question had been addressed to the causeless uneasi- 
ness within him. 

“Why did you say that?” asked Eddie Willers, ins voice tense. 

The bum leaned against the side of the doorway: a wedge of bro- 
ken glass behind him, reflected the metal yellow of the >ky. 

“Why does it bother you?’' he asked 

“It doesn't,” snapped Eddie Willers. 

He reached hastily into his pocket. The bum had stopped him and 
asked for a dime, then had gone on talking, as it to kill that moment 
and postpone the problem of the next. Pleas for dimes were so fre- 
quent in the streets these days that it was not necessary to listen to 
explanations and he had' no desire to hear the details of this bum’s 
particular despair 

“Go get vout cup ol coffee.” he said, handing the dime to the 
shadow- that had no face. 

“Thank you, sir,” said the \oice. without interest, and the face 
leaned forward for a moment. The face was wind-browned, cut by 
lines of weariness and cynical resignation; the eyes were intelligent. 

Eddie Willers walked on, wondering why he always felt it at this 
time of day. this sense of dread without reason. No, he thought, not 
dread, there's nothing to fear: just an immense, diffused apprehension, 
with no source or object. He had become accustomed to the feeling, 
but he could find no explanation for it; yet the bum had spoken as 
if he knew that Eddie felt it, as if he thought that one should feel 
it, and more: as if he knew the reason. 

Eddie Willers pulled his shoulders straight, in conscientious self- 
discipline. He had to stop this, he thought; he was beginning to 
imagine things. Had he always felt it? He was thirty-two years old. 
He tried to think buck. No, he hadn’t; but he amid not remember 
when it had started. The feeling came to him suddenly, at random 

11 



intervals, and now it was coming more often than ever. It’s the twi- 
light, he thought; I hate the twilight. 

The clouds and the shafts of skyscrapers against them were turning 
brown, like an old painting in oil, the color of a fading masterpiece. 
Long streaks of grime ran from under the pinnacles down the slen- 
der, soot-eaten walls. High on the side of a tower there was a crack 
in the shape of a motionless lightning, the length of ten stories. A 
jagged object cut the sky above the roofs; it was half a spire, still 
holding the glow of the sunset; the gold leaf had long since peeled 
off the other half. The glow was red and still, like the reflection of 
a fire: not an active fire, but a dying one which it is too late to stop. 

No, thought Eddie Willers, there was nothing disturbing in the 
sight of the city. It looked as it had always looked. 

He walked on, reminding himself that he was late in reluming to 
the office. He did not like the task which he had to perlorm on his 
return, but it had to be done. So he did not attempt to delay it, but 
made himself svalk faster. 

He turned a corner. In the narrow space between the dark silhou- 
ettes of two buildings, as in the crack of a door, he saw the page of 
a gigantic calendar suspended in the sky 

It was the calendar that the mayor of New York had erected last 
year on the top of a building, so that citizens might tell the day ot 
the month as they told the hours of the day, by glancing up at a 
public tower. A white rectangle hung over the city, imparting the 
date to the men in the streets below. In the rusty light ol this eve- 
ning's sunset, the rectangle said Seplembei 2. 

Eddie Willers looked away. He had never liked ihe sight ol that 
calendar. It disturbed him. in a manner he a>uld not explain or 
define. The feeling seemed to blend with his sense of uneasiness; it 
had the same quality. 

He thought suddenly that there was some phrase, a kind of quota- 
tion, that expressed what the calendar seemed to suggest. But he 
could not recall it. He walked, groping for a sentence that hung in 
his mind as an empty shape. He could neither fill it nor dismiss it. 
He glanced back. The white rectangle stood above the roofs, saying 
in immovable finality. September 2. 

Eddie Willers shifted his glance down to the street, to a vegetable 
pushcart at the stoop of a brownstone house. He saw a pile of bright 
gold carrots and the fresh green onions. He saw a clean white curtain 
blowing at an open window. He saw a bus turning a corner, expeitly 
steered. He wondered why he felt reassured - and then, why he felt 
the sudden, inexplicable wish that these things were not left in the 
open, unprotected against the empty space above. 

When he came to Fifth Avenue, he kept his eyes on the windows 
of the stores he passed. There was nothing he needed or wished to 
buy; but he liked to see the display of goods, anjf goods, objects 
made by men, to be used by men. He enjoyed the siiht of a prospei- 
ous street; not more than every fourth one of the sfores was out of 
business, its windows dark and empty. 

He did not know why he suddenly thought ot thc| oak tree. Noth- 
ing had recalled it. But he thought of it — and of his childhood sum- 

12 



mers on the Taggart estate. He had spent most of his childhood with 
the Taggart children, and now he worked for them, as his father and 
grandfather had worked for their father and grandfather. 

The great oak tree had stood on a hill over the Hudson, in a 
lonely spot on the Taggart estate, Eddie Willers, aged seven, liked 
to come and look at that tree. It had stood there for hundreds of 
years, and he thought it would always stand there. Its roots clutched 
the hill like a fist with fingers sunk into the soil, and he thought that 
if a giant were to seize it by the top, he would not be able to uproot 
it, but would swing the hill and the whole of the earth with it, like 
a ball at the end of a string. He felt safe in the oak tree's presence; 
it was a thing that nothing could change or threaten; it was his great- 
est symbol of strength. 

One night, lightning struck the oak tree, Eddie saw it next morn- 
ing. It lay broken in half, and he looked into its trunk as into the 
mouth of a black tunnel. The trunk was only an empty shell; its 
heart had rotted away long ago; there was nothing inside— just a 
thin gray dust that was being dispersed by the whim of the faintest 
wind. The living power had gone, and the shape it left had not been 
able to stand without it. 

Years later, he heard it said that children should be protected 
from shock, from their first knowledge of death, pain or fear. But 
these had never scarred him; his shock came when he stood very 
quietly, looking into the black hole of the trunk. It was an immense 
betrayal — the more terrible because he could not grasp what it was 
that had been betrayed. It was not himself, he knew, nor his trust; 
it was something else. He stood there for a while, making no sound, 
then he walked back to the house. He never spoke about it to any- 
one, then or since. 

Eddie Willers shook his head, as the screech of a rusty mechanism 
changing a traffic light stopped him on the edge of a curb. He felt 
anger at himself. There was no reason that he had to remember the 
oak tree tonight. It meant nothing to him any longer, only a faint 
tinge of sadness — and somewhere within him, a drop of pain moving 
briefly and vanishing, like a raindrop on the glass of a window, its 
course in the shape of a question mark. 

He wanted no sadness attached to his childhood; he loved its mem- 
ories: any day of it he remembered now seemed flooded by a still, 
brilliant sunlight. It seemed to him as if a few rays from it reached 
into his present: not rays, more like pinpoint spotlights that gave an 
occasional moment’s glitter to his job, to his lonely apartment, to 
the quiet, scrupulous progression of his existence. 

He thought of a summer day when he was ten years old. That 
day, in a clearing of the woods, the one precious companion of his 
childhood told him what they would do when they grew up. The 
words were harsh and glowing, like the sunlight. He listened in admi- 
ration and in wonder. When he was asked what he would want to 
do, he answered at once, '‘Whatever is right” and added, “You 
ought to do something great ... 1 mean, the two of us together.” 
“What?” she asked. He said, ”1 don’t know. That’s what we ought 
’ to find out. Not just what you said. Not just business and earning a 

13 



living. Things like winning battles, or saving people out of fires, or 
climbing mountains.” "What for?” she asked. He said, "The minister 
said last Sunday that we must always reach for the best within us. 
What do you suppose is the best within us?” "I don’t know.” "We’ll 
have to find out.” She did not answer; she was looking away, up the 
railroad track. 

Eddie Wiliers smiled. He had said, "Whatever is right,” twenty- 
two years ago. He had kept that statement unchallenged ever since; 
the other questions had faded in his mind; he had been too busy to 
ask them. But he still thought it self-evident that' one had to do what 
was right; he had never learned how people could want to do other- 
wise; he had learned only that they did. It still seemed simple and 
incomprehensible to him: simple that things should be right, and 
incomprehensible that they weren't. He knew that they weren’t. He 
thought of that, as he turned a corner and came to the great building 
of Taggart Transcontinental. 

The building stood over the street as its tallest and proudest stiuc- 
ture. Eddie Wiliers always smiled at his first sight of it. Its long bands 
of windows were unbroken, in contrast to those of its neighbors. Its 
rising lines cut the sky, with no crumbling corners or worn edges. It 
seemed to stand above the years, untouched. It would always stand 
there, thought Eddie Wiliers. 

Whenever he entered the Taggart Building, he felt relief and a 
sense of security. This was a place of competence and power. The 
floors of its hallways were mirrors made of marble. The frosted rect- 
angles of its electric fixtures were chips of solid light. Behind sheets 
of glass, rows of girls sat at typewriters, the clicking oi their keys 
like the sound of speeding train wheels. And like an answering echo, 
a faint shudder went through the walls at times, rising from under 
the building, from the tunnels of the great terminal where trains 
started out to cross a continent and slopped after crossing it again, as 
they had started and stopped for generation after generation. Taggart 
Transcontinental, thought Eddie Wiliers, From Ocean to Ocean — 
the proud slogan ol his childhood, so much more shining and holy 
than any commandment of the Bible. From Ocean to Ocean, for- 
ever — thought Eddie Wiliers, in the manner of a rededication, as he 
walked through the spotless halls into the heart of the building, into 
the office of James Taggart. President ol Taggart Transcontinental. 

James Taggart sat at his desk. He looked like a man approaching 
fifty, who had crossed into age from adolescence, without the inter- 
mediate stage of youth. He had a small, petulant mouth, and thin 
hair clinging to a bald forehead. His posture had a limp, decentral- 
ized sloppiness, as il in defiance of his tall, slender body, a body with 
an elegance of line intended for the confident poiie of an aristocrat, 
but transformed into the gawkiness of a lout. Thp flesh of his face 
was pale and soft. His eyes were pale and veiled, jjwith a glance that 
moved slowly, never quite stopping, gliding off fcnd past things in 
eternal resentment of their existence. He looked obstinate and 
drained. He was thirty-nine years old. 

He lifted his head with irritation, at the sound of the opening door. 

14 



“Don’t bother me* don’t bother roe, don’t bother me,” said James 
Taggart. 

Eddie Wiliers walked toward the desk. 

“It’s important, Jim,” he said, not raising his voice. 

“All right, all right, what is it?’’ 

Eddie Wiliers looked at a map on the wall ot the office. The map’s 
colors had faded under the glass — he wondered dimly how many 
Taggart presidents had sat betore it and for how many years. The 
Taggart Transcontinental Railroad, the network of red lines slashing 
the faded body of the country from New York to San Francisco, 
looked like a system of blood vessels, It looked as if once, long ago, 
the blood had shot down the main artery and, under the pressure of 
its own overabundance, had branched out at random points, running 
all over the country. One red streak twisted its way from Cheyenne, 
Wyoming, down to Ei Paso, Texas— the Rio Norte Line ot Taggart 
Transcontinental. New tracing had been added recently and the red 
streak had been extended south beyond El Paso — but Eddie Wiliers 
turned away hastily when his eyes reached that point. 

He looked at James Taggait and said, “It’s the Rio Norte Line.” 
He noticed Taggart’s glance moving down to a comer of the desk. 
“We’ve had another wreck.” 

“Railroad accidents happen every day. Did you have to bother 
me about that?” 

“You know what Tm saying, Jim. The Rio Norte is done for. That 
liack is shot. Down the whole line.” 

“We are getting a new track ’* 

Eddie Wiliers continued as if there had been no answer: “That 
track is shot It’s no use trying to run trains down there. People are 
giving up trying to use them.” 

“There is not a railroad in the country, it seems to me, that doesn’t 
have a few branches running at a deficit. We’re not the only ones. 
It’s a national condition — a temporary national condition.” 

Eddie stood looking at him silently. What Taggart disliked about 
Eddie Wiliers was this habit of looking straight into people’s eyes. 
Eddie’s eyes were blue, wide and questioning; he had blond hair 
and a square face, unremarkable except for that look of scrupulous 
attentiveness and open, puTvled wonder. 

“What do you want?” snapped Taggart. 

“I just came to tell you something you had to know, because 
somebody had to tell you.” 

“That we’ve had another accident?” 

“That we can’t give up the Rio Norte Line.” 

James Taggart seldom raised his head; when he looked at people, 
he did so by lifting his heavy eyelids and staring upward from under 
the expanse ot his bald forehead. 

“Who’s thinking of giving up the Rio Norte Line?” he asked. 
“There’s never been any question of giving it up. I resent your saying 
it. I resent it very much.” 

“But we haven’t met a schedule for the last six months. We 
haven’t completed a run without some sort of breakdown* major or 

15 



minor. We're losing all our shippers, one after another. How long 
can we last?” 

“You’re a pessimist. Eddie. You lack faith. That’s what under- 
mines the morale of an organization.” 

“You mean that nothing's going to he done about the Rio 
Norte Line?” 

“I haven’t said that at all. Just as soon as we get the new track—” 

“Jim, there isn’t gomg to he any new track.” He watched Taggart’s 
eyelids move up slowly. “I’ve just come back from the office of 
Associated Steel. I’ve spoken to Orren Boyle.” 

“What did he say?” 

“He spoke for an hour and a half and did not give me a single 
straight answer.” 

“What did you bother him tor? 1 believe the first order of rail 
wasn’t due for delivery until next month.” 

“And before that, it was due tor delivery three months ago.” 

“Unforeseen circumstances. Absolutely beyond Orren's control.” 

“And before that, it was due six months earlier. Jim. we have 
waited for Associated Steel to deliver that rail for thirteen months.” 

“What do you want me to do? I can’t run Orren Boyle’s business.” 

“I want you to understand that we can’t wait.” 

Taggart asked slowly, his voice half-mocking, hall-cautious, “What 
did my sister say?” 

“She won't be back until tomorrow.” 

“Well, what do you want me to do 7 ” 

“ITiat’s for you to decide.” 

“Well, whatever else you say, there's one thing you're not going 
to mention next — and that’s Reardon Steel.” 

Eddie did not answer at once, then said quietly, “All right. Jim. I 
won't mention it.” 

“Orren ts my friend.” He heard no answer. “I resent your attitude. 
Orren Boyle will deliver that rail just as soon as it's humanly possi- 
ble. So long as he can’t deliver it, nobody can blame us.” 

“Jim! What are you talking about? Don’t you understand that the 
Rio Norte Line is breaking up - whether anybody blames us or not?” 

“People would put up with it — they’d have to — if it weten’t for 
the Phoenix- Durango,” He saw Eddie’s face tighten. “Nobody ever 
complained about the Rio Norte I ine, until the Phoenix- Durango 
came on the scene.” 

“The Phoenix-Durango is doing a brilliant job.” 

“Imagine a thing called the Phoenix -Durango competing with Tag- 
gart Transcontinental! It was nothing but a U>cal milk line ten 
years ago.” 

“It’s got most of the freight traffic of Arizona, New Mexico and 
Colorado now.” Taggart did not answer. “Jim, wfe can’t lose Colo- 
rado. It’s our last hope. It's everybody’s last hopfc. If we don’t pull 
ourselves together, we'll lose every big shipper ;n the slate to the 
Phoenix-Durango. We’ve lost the Wyatt oil field*.” 

“I don’t see why everybody keeps talking about the Wvatt oil 
fields.” 

“Because Ellis Wyatt is a prodigy who — ” 

16 



“Damn Ellis Wyatt!” 

Those oil wells, Eddie thought suddenly, didn’t they have some* 
thing in common with the blood vessels on the map? Wasn’t that the 
way the red stream of Taggart Transcontinental had shot across the 
country, years ago, a feat that seemed incredible now? He thought of 
the oil wells spouting a black stream that ian over a continent almost 
faster than the trains of the Phoenix Durango could carry it. That 
oil field had been only a rocky patch in the mountains of Colorado, 
given up as exhausted long ago. Ellis Wyatt’s father had managed 
to squeeze an obscure living to the end of his days, out of the dying 
oil wells. Now it was as if somebody had given a shot of adrenaline 
to the heart ot the mountain, the heart had started pumping, the 
black blood had burst through the rocks -of course it’s blood, 
thought Eddie Willers, because blood is supposed to feed, to give 
life, and that is what Wyatt Oil had done. It had shocked empty 
slopes of ground into sudden existence, it had brought new towns, 
new power plants, new factories to a region nobody had ever noticed 
on any map. New factories, thought Eddie Willers. at a time when 
the freight revenues from all the great old industries were dropping 
slowly year by year; a rich new oil field, at a time when the pumps 
were stopping in one famous field after another; a new industrial 
state where nobody had expected anything but cattle and beets. One 
man had done it, and he had done it in eight years; this, thought 
Eddie Willers, was like the stones he had read in school books and 
never quite believed, the stories of men who had lived in the days 
of the country’s youth. He wished he could meet Ellis Wyatt. There 
was a great deal of talk about him. but few had ever met him: he 
seldom came to New York They said he was thirty- three years old 
ami had a violent temper. He had discovered some way to revive 
exhausted oil wells and he had proceeded to revive them. 

‘'Ellis Wyatt ts a greedy bastard who’s alter nothing but money,” 
said James Taggart. “It seems to me that there are more important 
things in life than making money.” 

“What are you talking about. Jim? What has that got to do 
with— ” 

“Besides, he’s double-crossed us. We setved the Wyatt oil fields 
for years, most adequately. In the days of old man Wyatt, we ran a 
tank train a week.” 

“These are not the days of old man Wyatt, Jim. The Phoenix- 
Durango runs two tank trains a day down there — and it runs them 
on schedule.” 

“If he had given us time to grow along with him — ” 

“He has no time to waste.” 

“What does he expect? That wc drop all our other shippers, sacri- 
fice the interests of the whole country and give him all our trains?” 

“Why, no. He doesn’t expect anything. He just deals with the 
Phoenix-Durango.” 

“I think he’s a destructive, unscrupulous ruffian. I think he’s an 
irresponsible upstart who’s been grossly overrated,” It was aston- 
ishing to hear a sudden emotion in James Taggart’s lifeless voice. 

17 



♦Tm not so sure that his oil fields are such a beneficial achievement 
It seems to me that he’s dtslocated the economy of the whole coun- 
try Nobody expected Colorado to become an industrial state How 
can we have any secunty or plan anything d everything changes all 
the time 7 " 

“Good God, Jim’ He’s—" 

4 Yes, I know I know, he’s making money But that is not the 
standard it seems to me, by which one gauges a man’s value to 
society /\nd as tor his oil. he'd come trawling to us, and he’d wait 
his turn along with all the other shippers, and he wouldn t demand 
more than his fair shaic ol transpoitation -if it weren’t tor the Phoe- 
mx-Durango We can't help it if we’re up against destructive compe- 
tition of that kind Nobody can blame us ’* 

The pressure in his chest and temples, thought Eddie Willers, was 
the strain of the effort he was making he had decided to make the 
issue clear for once and the issue was so clear, he thought, that 
nothing could bar it from Taggait’s understanding, unless it was the 
failure of his own presentation So he had tried hard, but he was 
failing, just as he had always failed m all of their discussions, no 
matter what he said, they never seemed to be talking about the 
same subject 

"Jim, what are you saying 7 Does it matter that nobody blames 
us- when the road is falling apart 7 ’ 

James Taggart smiled, it was a thin smile amused and cold k lt\ 
touching, Fddic, he said Its touching your devotion to laggart 
Transcontinental If you don t look out you’ll turn into one of those 
real leudal serfs ’ 

"That's what 1 am Jim 

But may 1 ask whether it is yout job to discuss these matteis 
with me } ' 

"No, it isn’t ’ 

"-Then whv don’t you learn that we have departments to take care 
of things 7 Why don t you report all this to whoeser's concerned 7 
Whv don’t you cry on my dear sister’s shoulder 
"Look. Jim, 1 know it s not my place to talk to von But I can’t 
understand what’s going on 1 don t know what it is that your proper 
advisers tell you or why they can't make you understand So I 
thought I d try to tell you myself ’ 

"I appreciate our childhood friendship Lddie but do you think 
that that should entitle you to walk in heie unannounced whenever 
you wish 7 Considering your own rank, shouldn’t you remember that 
I am president of Taggart Iranscontinental 7 " 

This was wasted t ddic Willers Uxiked at hint as usual not hurt, 
merely pu^/led, and asked, 4 Then you don't initnd to do anything 
about the Rio Norte Line 7 " 

“I haven’t said that I haven’t said that at all "flaggait was looking 
at the map, at the red streak south of FI Paso *‘Just as soon as the 
San Sebastian Mines get going and our Mexican branch begins to 
pay off—” 

“Don’t let’s talk about that, Jim " 

18 



Taggart turned, startled by the unprecedented phenomenon of an 
implacable anger m Eddie's voice “What's the matter?" 

“You know what's the matter Your sister said — •” 

“Damn my sister 1 ” said James Taggart. 

Eddie Willers did not move He did not answer. He stood looking 
straight ahead But he did not see James Taggart or anything in 
the office. 

After a moment, he bowed and walked out 
In the anteroom, the clerks of James Taggart's personal staff were 
switching otf the lights, getting ready to leave foi the day But Pop 
Harper, chief clerk, still sat at his desk, twisting the levers of a half- 
dismembered typewriter Everybody in the company had the impres- 
sion that Pop Harper was born m that particular corner at that panic- 
ulai desk and never intended to leave it He had been chief clerk 
lor James Iaggarfs lather 

Pop Harpet glanced up at Eddie Willers as he came out of the 
piesidenfs office It was a wise, slow glance it seemed to say that 
he knew that Eddie's visit to their pail ot the building meant trouble 
on the line, knew that nothing had come of the visit, and was com 
plctely inditfeienl to the knowledge it was the cynical mditteience 
which Eddie Wilier^ had seen in the eyis of the bum on the street 
corner 

Say. I ddie. know wlieic 1 could get some woolen undershuts 7 * 
he asked Tried all over town, but nobody’s got ’em ” 

“1 don’t know ” said t ddie slopping “Why do you ask mc^” 
i just ask everybody Muybt somdK>d}’IJ tell me” 

Eddie looked uneasilv at the blank emaciated face and white hair 
“It's void in this joint said Pop Haiptr it’s going to be colder 
this winter ’ 

“What are you doing’*” l ddie asked pointing at the pieces of 
typewriter 

‘I he damn thing’s busted again No use sending it out. took them 
three months to h\ it the last time I bought 1 d patch it up myself 
Not for long, I guess ” He let his list drop down on the keys ‘ You’re 
ready foi the pink pile, old pal \our da>s are numbered” 

Eddie started I hat was the sentence he had tried to remember 
Your days are numbered But he had torgotten in what connection 
he had tried to temember it 

it s no use, Eddie, ’ said Pop Huipcr 
"What's no use 7 ” 

‘Nothing Anything ’ 

“What’s the matter. Pop 7 ” 

“I'm not going to requisition a new typewriter The new ones mt 
made ol tin When the old ones go, that will be the end of typewrit- 
ing l here was an accident m the subway this morning, their brakes 
wouldn’t work You ought to go home, Eddie, turn on the radio and 
listen to a good dance band Forget it, boy T rouble with you is you 
never had a hobby. Somebody stole the elect nc light bulbs again, 
from off the staircase, down where I live. I’ve got a pain in my chest. 
Couldn’t get any cough diops this morning, the drugstore on our 
comer went bankrupt last week The Texas-Western Railroad went 

IQ 





bankrupt last month They closed the Queensborough Bridge yester- 
day for temporary repairs Oh well what’s the use 9 Who is John 
Galt r * 


* * 

She sat at the window of the tram, her head thrown back, one leg 
stretched across to the empty seat before her The window frame 
trembled with the speed of the motion, the pane hung ovei empty 
darkness, and dots o! light slashed across the glass as luminous 
streaks once m a while 

Her leg. sculptured by the tight sheen of the stocking, its long line 
running straight, over an arched instep, to the tip of a foot in a high- 
heeled pump, had a feminine elegance that seemed out ot place m 
the dusty tram car and oddly incongruous with the rest of her She 
wore a battered camel’s hait coat that had been expensive, wrapped 
shapelessly about her slender nervous body I he coat collar was 
raised to the slanting brim of her hat A sweep of brown hair fell 
back, almost touching the line ot hei shoulders Her face was made 
of angular planes, the shape ot her mouth clear-cut, a sensual mouth 
held closed with inflexible precision She kept hei hands m the coat 
packets, her posture taut as it she resented immobiht), and unfemi 
nine, as if she were unconscious of her own body and that it was a 
'woman’s bod\ 


She sat listening to the. music It was a symphony ot triumph Hie 
, notes flowed up they spoke ot rising and thev weic the rising itsell, 
dvey were the essence and the tonn oi upward motion they seemed 
Krembody every human act and thought that had ascent as its mo- 
Ervp It was a sunburst o! sound breaking out of hiding and spreading 
open It had the freedom of release and the tension of purpose It 
swept space dean and left nothing but the joy of an unobstructed 
etlort Only a taint echo within the sounds spoke of that from which 
flw' music had escaped but spoke in laughing astonishment at the 
TlKtovery that there was no ugliness or pam and there never had 
half to be It was the song of an immense deliverance 
She thought For just a few moments- while this lasts — it is all 
right to surrender completely -to forget everything and just peimit 
yourself to feel She thought Let go —drop the controls- this is n 
Somewhere on the edge ot her mind, under the music, she heaid 
the sound of tram wheels Hiey knocked in an even rhythm, every 
fourth kniKk accented, as it stressing a conscious puipose She could 
refax because she hoard the wheels She listened to the symphony, 
thmkimjjgJg^ the wheels have to be kept going, and this is 

dffbwr^ihat symphony before but she knew that it 
wasj^JifKm t^lley She recognized the violence and the 
^fe^mheent mtensityOShe fecogm/ed the style the theme, it was 
J^elc#i?,fiRomplex mdodfema time when no on? wrote melody any 
' longer JS he* ipokw % at fhe ceiling ot ihe ear, but she did 
jnol lec* ft a^d Jie hpd Mgciten where she wa«i She did not know 
to? neariigja lull symphony orchestra or only the 
yteme: way heaf*g the orchestration in hei own mmd 

' She thdugntjdjml^thot thfJb had been premonitory echoes of this 

A Oi \\<bbf*Zf 20 


iwhdjb&rrtfte* 

r s z,ms 


; she way he a f 

thought jdusly,tl)ot thA 



theme in all of Richard Hailey’s work, through all the years of his 
long struggle, to the day, in his middle-age, when fame struck him 
suddenly and knocked him out. This — she thought, listening to the 
symphony — had been the goal of his struggle. She remembered half- 
hinted attempts in his music, phrases that promised it, broken bits 
of melody that started but never quite reached it; when Richard 
Halley wrote this, he . . . She sat up straight. When did Richard 
Halley write this? 

In the same instant, she realized where she was and wondered for 
the first time where that music came from. 

A few steps away, at the end of the car, a brakeman was adjusting 
the controls of the air-conditioner. He was blond and young. He was 
whistling the theme of the symphony. She realized that he had been 
whistling it lor some time and that this was all she had heard. 

She watched him incredulously for a while, before she raised her 
voice to ask, “Tell me please what are you whistling?” 

The boy turned to her. She met a direct glance and saw an open, 
eager smile, as if he were sharing a confidence with a friend. She 
liked his face — its lines were light and firm, it did not have that look 
of loose muscles evading the responsibility of a shape, which she had 
learned to expect in people’s faces. 

“It’s the Halley Concerto,” he aaswered, smiling. 

“Which one?” 

“The Fifth.” 

She let a moment pass, before she said slowly and very carefully, 
“Richard Halley wrote only four concertos ” 

The boy’s smile vanished. It was as if he were jolted back to 
reality, just as she had been a few moments ago. It was as if a 
shutter were slammed down, and what remained was a face without 
expression, impersonal, indifferent and empty. 

“Yes, of course,” he said. “I’m wrong. I made a mistake.” 

“Then what was it?” 

“Something I heard somewhere.” 

“What?” 

“I don’t know.” 

“Where did you hear it?” 

“1 don’t remember.” 

She paused helplessly; he was turning away from her without fur- 
ther inteiest. 

“It sounded like a Halley theme.” she said. “But l know every 
note he’s ever written and he never wrote that.” 

There was still no expression, only a faint look of attentiveness 
on the boy’s face, as he turned back to her and asked, “You like 
the music of Richard Halley?” 

“Yes,” she said, “l like it very much,” 

He considered her for a moment, as if hesitating, then he turned 
away. She watched the expert efficiency of his movements as he went 
on working. He worked in silence. 

She had not slept for two nights, but she could not permit herself 
to sleep; she had too many problems to consider and not much time: 
the train was due in New York early in the morning. She needed 

21 



the time, yet she wished the train would go faster; but it was the 
Taggart Comet, the fastest train in the country. 

She tried to think; but the music remained on the edge of her 
mind and she kept hearing it, in full chords, like the implacable steps 
of something that could not be stopped. . . . She shook her head 
angrily, jerked her hat off and lighted a cigarette. 

She would not sleep, she thought; she could last until tomorrow 
night. , . . The train wheels clicked in accented rhythm. She was so 
used to them that she did not hear them consciously, but the sound 
became a sense of peace within her. . . . When she extinguished her 
cigarette, she knew that she needed another one, but thought that 
she would give herself a minute, just a few minutes, before she would 
light it. . . . 

She had fallen asleep and she awakened with a jolt, knowing that 
something was wrong, before she knew what it was: the wheels had 
stopped, fhe car stood soundless and dim in the blue glow of the 
night lamps. She glanced at her watch: there was no reason for stop- 
ping. She looked out the window: the train stood still in the middle 
of empty fields. 

She heard someone moving in a seat across the aisle, and asked, 
“How long have we been standing?” 

A man’s voice answered indifferently, “About an hour.” 

The man looked after her, sleepily astonished, because she leaped 
to her feet and rushed to the door 

There was a cold wind outside, and an empty stretch of land under 
an empty sky. She heard weeds rustling in the daikness Far ahead, 
she saw the figures of men standing by the engine — and above them, 
banging detached in the sky, the red light of a signal. 

She walked rapidly toward them, past the motionless line of 
wheels. No one paid attention to her when she approached. The 
train crew and a few passengers stood clustered under the red light. 
They had stopped talking, they seemed to be waiting in placid 
indifference, 

“What’s the matter?” she asked. 

The engineer turned, astonished. Her question had sounded like 
an order, not like the amateur curiosity of a passenger. She stood, 
hands in pockets, coat collar raised, the wind beating, her hair in 
strands across her face. 

“Red light, lady.” he said, pointing up with his thumb. 

“How long has it been on?” 

“An hour.” 

We’re off the main track, aren't we?” 

“That’s right.” 

“Why?” 

“I don’t know.” 

The conductor spoke up. i don’t think we had atjjy business being 
sent off on a siding, that switch wasn’t working right! and this thing’s 
not working at all.” He jerked his head up at the rid light. “1 don’t 
think the signal’s going to change. I think it’s busted.” 

**Then what are you doing?” 

“Waiting for it to change.” 


22 



In her pause of startled anger, the fireman chuckled. "Last week, 
the crack special of the Atlantic Southern got left on a siding for 
two hours— just somebody’s mistake.” 

"This is the Taggart Cornet,” she said. "The Comet has never 
been late.” 

"She’s the only one in the country that hasn’t,” said the engineer. 

"There’s always a first time,” said the fireman. 

"You don’t know about railroads, lady,” said a passenger. 
"There’s not a signal system or a dispatcher in the country that’s 
worth a damn.” 

She did not turn or notice him, but spoke to the engineer. "If you 
know that the signal is broken, what do you intend to do?” 

He did not like her tone of authority, and he could not understand 
why she assumed it so naturally. She looked like a young girl; only 
her mouth and eyes showed that she was a woman in her thirties. 
The dark gray eyes were direct and disturbing, as if (hey cut through 
things, throwing the inconsequential out of the way. The face seemed 
faintly familiar to him, but he could not recall where he had seen it. 

"Lady. I don't intend to stick my neck out,” he said. 

"He means,” said the fireman, "that our job’s to wait for orders.” 

"Your job is to run this (rain.” 

"Not against a red light. II the light says stop, we stop.” 

"A red light means danger, lady,” said the passengcr. 

"We’re not taking any chances,” said the engineer. "Whoever’® 
responsible for it, he’ll switch the blame to us if we move. So we’re 
not moving till somebody tells us to.” 

"And if nobody does?” 

"Somebody wilt turn up sooner or later.” 

"How long do you propose to wait?” 

The engineer shrugged. "Who is John Galt?” 

"He means,” said the fireman, "don’t ask questions nobody can 
answer.” 

She looked at the red light and at the lail that went off info the 
black, untouched distance. 

She said, "Proceed with caution to the next signal. If it’s in order, 
proceed to the main track. Then stop at the first open office.” 

"Yeah? Who says so?” 

"1 do.” 

"Who are you?” 

It was only the briefest pau.se, a moment of astonishment at a 
question she had not expected, but the engineer looked more closely 
at her face, and in time with her answer he gasped, "Good God!” 

She answered, not offensively, merely like a person who does not 
hear the question often: 

"Dagny Taggart.” 

"Well, HI be — ” said the fireman, and then they all remained 
silent. 

She went on, in the same tone of unstressed authority. "Proceed 
to the main track and hold the train for me at the first open office.” 

"Yes, Miss Taggart,” 


23 



•‘You’ll have to make up time. You’ve got the rest of the night to 
do it. Get the Comet in on schedule.” 

‘‘Yes, Miss Taggart.” 

She was turning to go* when the engineer asked, ”lf there’s any 
trouble, are you taking the responsibility for it. Miss Taggart?” 

”1 am.” 

The conductor followed her as she walked back to her car. He 
was saying, bewildered, ‘‘But . . . just a seat in a day coach* Miss 
Taggart? But how come? But why didn’t you let us know?” 

She smiled easily, “Had no lime to be formal. Had my own car 
attached to Number 22 out of Chicago, but got oft at Cleveland— 
and Number 22 was running late, so I let the car go. The Comet 
came next and I took it. There was no sleeping-car space left.” 

The conductor shook his head. “Your brother — he wouldn’t have 
taken a coach." 

She laughed. “No, he wouldn’t have.” 

The men by the engine watched her walking away. The young 
brakeman was among them. He asked, pointing alter her, “Who 
is that?" 

“ That’s who runs Taggart Transcontinental,” said the engineer; 
the respect in his voice was genuine. “That’s the Vice-President in 
Charge of Opera I ion ” 

When the train jolted forward, the blast of its whistle dying over 
the Helds, she sat by the window, lighting another cigarette. She 
thought: lt\ cracking to pieces, like this, all over the country, you 
can expect it anywhere, at any moment. But she fell no anger or 
anxiety: she had no time to feel. 

This would be just one more issue, to be settled along with the 
others. She knew that the superintendent of the Ohio Division was 
no good and that he was a friend of James Taggart. She had not 
insisted on throwing him out long ago only because she had no better 
man to put in his place. Good men were so strangely hard to find. 
But she would have to get i id of him, she thought, and she would 
give'his post to Owen Kellogg, the young engineer who was doing 
a brilliant job as one of the assistants to the manager of the T aggart 
Terminal in New York; it was Owen Kellogg who ran the Terminal. 
She had watched his work for some time; she had always looked for 
sparks of competence, like a diamond prospector in an unpromising 
wasteland. Kellogg was still too young to be made superintendent of 
a division; she had wanted to give him another year, but there was no 
time to wait. She would have to speak to him as soon as she returned. 

'The strip of earth, faintly visible ouisidc the window, w r as running 
faster now, blending into a gray stream. Htrough the dry phrases of 
calculations in her mind, she noticed that she did have time to feet 
something: it was the hard, exhilarating pleasure 'of action. 

* * 

With the first whistling rush of air, as the Comfcl plunged into the 
tunnels of the Taggart Terminal under the city oifNew York, Dagny 
Taggart sat up straight. She always felt it when thjfe train went under- 
ground— this sense of eagerness, of hope and of secret excitement. 
It was as if normal existence were a photograph f of shapeless things 

24 



in badly printed colors, but this was a sketch done in a few sharp 
strokes that made things seem clean, important— and worth doing. 

She watched the tunnels as they flowed past: bare walls of con- 
crete, a net of pipes and wires, a web of rails that went off into 
black holes where green and red lights hung as distant drops of color. 
There was nothing else, nothing to dilute it, so that one could admire 
naked purpose and the ingenuity that had achieved it. She thought 
of the Taggart Building standing above her head at this moment, 
growing straight to the sky, and she thought: These arc the roots of 
the building, hollow roots twisting under the ground, feeding the city. 

When the train stopped, when she got off and heard the concrete 
of the platform under her heels, she felt light, lifted, impelled to 
action. She started off. walking fast, as if the speed ot her steps could 
give form to the things she felt. It was a few moments before she 
realized that she was whistling a piece of music — and that it was the 
theme of Halley's Fifth Concerto. 

She felt someone looking at her and turned. The young brakeman 
stood watching her tensely. 

* * 

She sat on the arm of the big chair facing James Taggart's desk, 
her coat thrown open over a wrinkled traveling suit. Eddie Willers 
sat across the room, making notes once in a while. His title was that 
of Special Assistant to the Vice-President in Charge of Operation, 
and his main duty was to be her bodyguard against any waste of 
time. She asked him to be present at interviews of this nature, be- 
cause then she never had to explain anything to him afierwards. 
Jaines Taggart sat at his desk, his head drawn into his shoulders, 

"The Bio Norte Line is a pile of junk from one end to the other," 
she said. "It's much worse than 1 thought. But we're going to save 
it.” 

4 ‘Of course,” said James Taggart. 

“Some of the rail can be salvaged. Not much and not for long. 
We'll start laying now' rail in the mountain sections. Colorado tirst. 
We’ll get the new rail in two months.” 

“Oh, did Orren Boyle say he'll — ” 

“I've ordered the rail from Rearden Steel.” 

The slight, choked sound from Eddie Willers was his suppressed 
desire to cheer. 

James Taggait did not answer at once. “Dagny, why don’t you sit 
m the chair as one i* supposed to?” he said at last; his voice was 
petulant. “Nobody holds business conferences this way.” 

“1 do.” 

She waited. He asked, his eyes avoiding hers, “Did you say that 
you have ordered the rail from Rearden?” 

“Yesterday evening. 1 phoned him from Cleveland.’' 

“But the Board hasn’t authorized it. 1 haven’t authorized it. You 
haven’t consulted me.” 

She reached over, picked up the receiver of a telephone on his 
desk and handed St to him. 

“Call Rearden and cancel it,” she said, 

25 



James Taggart moved back in his chair “I haven’t said that,” he 
answered angrily * 1 haven’t said that at all ” 

“Then it stands**” 

“I haven’t said that, either ” 

She turned “Eddie, have them draw up the contract with Rearden 
Steel Inn will sign it ” She took a ciumpled piece i>l notepaper lrom 
her pocket and tossed it to Eddie 4 I here’s the figures and terms * 
Taggart said, “But the Board hasn t — 

“The Board hasn't anything to do with it They uuthon/ed you to 
buy the rail thirteen months ago Where you buy it is up to you ’ 
“I don't think it’s proper to make such a decision without giving 
the Board a chance to express an opinion And I don t see why I 
should be made to take the responsibility 
"I am taking it ” 

“What about the expenditure which— 

“Rearden is charging less than Orren Boyle s Associated Steel ” 

4 Yes, and what about Orren Boyle* 

4 Tve cancelled the contract We had the light to cancel it six 
months ago ” 

“When did you do that * 

“Yesterday ' 

“But he hasn’t called to have me confirm it 
“He won’t ” 

Taggart sat looking down at his desk She wondered why he re 
sented the necessity of dealing with Rear den, and why his resentment 
had such an odd, evasive quahtv Rearden Steel had been the chief 
supplier of Taggart Transcontinental lor ten years, ever since the 
first Rearden furnace was fired, m the days when their father was 
president of the railroad Tor ten years, most of then rail had come 
ftom Rearden Steel There were not many firms m the country who 
delivered what was ordered, when and as ordered Real den Steel 
was one of them If she were insane, thought Dagny she would 
conclude that her brother hated to deal with Rearden because Rear 
den did his job with superlative efficiency but she would not con 
elude it, because she thought that such a feeling was not within the 
humanly possible 

‘It isn't faiT,” said James laggart 
“What isn’t *” 

‘That we always give all our business to Rearden It seems to me 
we should give somebody else a chance, too Rearden doesn’t need 
as, he’s plenty big enough We ought to help the smaller fellows to 
develop Otherwise, we’re just encouraging a monopoly * 

“Don’t talk tripe, Jim ’’ 

“Why do we always have to get things from Rearden 
“Because we always get them ’* 

“I don't like Henry Rearden ” 

“I do But what does that matter, one way or th$ other* We need 
rails and he’s the only one who can give them to tis ” 

“The human element is very important You haye no sense of the 
human element at all ’’ 

“We’re talking about saving a railroad, Jim.” 

26 



“Yes* of course* of course, but still, you haven’t any sense of the 
human clement.” 

“No. I haven’t.” 

“If we give Reardcn such a large order for steel rails — ” 

“They’re not going to be steel. They’re Rcarden Metal.” 

She had always avoided personal reactions, but she was forced to 
break her rule when she saw the expression on Taggart’s face. She 
burst out laughing. 

Rearden Metal was a new alloy, produced by Rearden after ten 
years of experiments He had placed it on the market recently. He 
had received no orders and had found no customers. 

Taggart could not understand the transition from the laughter to 
the sudden tone of Dagny’s voice; the voice was cold and harsh: 
“Drop it, Jim. I know everything you’re going to say. Nobody’s ever 
used it before. Nobody approves of Rearden Metal. Nobody’s inter- 
ested in it. Nobody wants it. Still, our rails are going to be made of 
Rearden Metal ” 

“But . . .” said Taggart, “but . . but nubody’s ever used it before!” 

He observed, with satisfaction, that she was silenced by anger. He 
liked to observe emotions; they were like red lanterns strung along 
the dark unknown of another’s personality, marking vulnerable 
points. But how one could feel a personal emotion about a metal 
alloy, and what such an emotion indicated, was incomprehensible to 
him; so he could make no use of his discovery. 

“The consensus ol the best metallurgical authorities,” he said, 
“seems to be highly skeptical about Rearden Metal, contending—” 

“Drop it, Jim.” 

“Well, whose opinion did you take?” 

“I don’t ask tor opinions.” 

“What do you go by?” 

“Judgment.” 

“Well, whose judgment did you take 0 ” 

“Mine,” 

“But whom did you consult about it?” 

“Nobody.” 

“Then what on eaith do you know about Rearden Metal?” 

“That it’s the greatest thing ever put on the market.” 

“Why°” 

“Because it's tougher than steel, cheaper than steel and will outlast 
any hunk of metal in existence.” 

“But who says so ,; ” 

“Jim, l studied engineering in college. When 1 see things. I see 
them,” 

“What did you see?” 

“Reardcn’s formula and the tests he showed me.” 

“Well* if it were any good, somebody would have used it* and 
nobody has.” He saw the Hash of anger, and went on nervously: 
“How can you know it’s good? How can you be sure? How can 
you decide?” 

“Somebody decides such things, Jim. Who?” 

27 



4V WeU, 1 don’t see why we have to be the first ones I don’t see it 
at ail " 

“Do you want to save the Rio Norte Line or not*>” He did not 
answer ‘If the road could afford it, I would scrap every piece of 
rad over the whole system and replace it with Rearden Metal All 
of it needs replacing None of it will last much longer But we can’t 
afford it We have to get out ol a bad hole, first Do >ou want us 
to pull through or not 

“We’re still the best railroad in the country I he others are doing 
much worse ’ 

“Then do >ou want us to remain in the hole* 

‘I haven t said that* Why do you always oversimplify things that 
way 7 And if you re worried about money, 1 don t see why you want 
to waste it on the Rio Norte l me when the Phoenix Durango has 
robbed us of all our business down there Why spend money when 
we have no protection against a competitor who 11 destroy our 
investment 7 

Because the Phoenix Durango is an excellent railroad but l in 
tend to make the Rio Norte t inc bettu than that Because I m 
going to beat the Phoenix Durango d necessary -only it won t be 
necessary, because there will be room tor two oi three railroads to 
make fortunes in Colorado Because I <J mortgage the system to build 
a branch to any district around f llis Wyatt 
“I’m sick of hearing about Lllis Wyatt 

He did not like the way her eyes moved to look at him and n 
mamed still, looking for a moment 
“1 don’t see* any need for immediate action he said he sounded 
offended Just what do you consider so alarming in the present 
situation of Taggart rranseont mental * ' 

The consequences of your policies Jim ’ 

“Which policies } ' 

“I hat thirteen months experiment with Associated Steel foi one 
Your Mexican catastrophe, for another 

'The Board approved the Associated Steel contract he said hast 
dy * The Board voted to build the San Sebastian Line Besides I 
don’t see why you call it a catastrophe 

* Because the Mexican government is going to nationalize youi 
line any day now ’ 

“That’s a lie 1 ’ His voice was almost a scream rhat s nothing but 
vicious rumors* 1 have it on very good inside authority that - ’’ 
“Don’t show that you’re scared, Jim she said contemptuously 
He did not answer 

“It’s no use getting panicky about it now, she said All wc can 
do is try to cushion the blow It's going to be 4 bad blow forty 
million dollars is a loss from which we won t recover easily But 
Taggart 1 ranscontmental has withstood many bad Shocks in the past 
I’ll see to it that it withstands this one ” 

“I refuse to consider, l absolutely iefusc to consider the possibility 
of the San Sebastian Line being nationalized ’’ 

“All nght Don’t consider it ’ 

She remained sdent He said defensively, “I dofTt see why you’re 

28 



so eager to give a chance to Ellis Wyatt, yet you think it 4 s wrong to 
take part in developing an underprivileged country that never had 
a chance.” 

“Ellis Wyatt is not asking anybody to give him a chance. And I’m 
not in business to give chances. I’m running a railroad.” 

“That’s an extremely narrow view, it seems to me. 1 don’t sec why 
we should want to help one man instead of a whole nation.” 

“Fm not interested in helping anybody. 1 want to make money.” 

“That’s an impractical attitude. Selfish greed for profit is a thing 
of the past. It has been generally conceded that the interests of 
society as a whole must always be placed first in any business under- 
taking which — ” 

“How long do you intend to talk in order to evade the issue. Jim?” 

“What issue?” 

“'Hie order for Rearden Metal.” 

He did not answer. He sat studying her silently. Her slender body, 
about to slump from exhaustion, was held erect by the straight fine 
of the shoulders, and the shoulders were held by a conscious effort 
of will. Few people liked her face: the face was too cold, the eyes 
too intense; nothing could evei lend her the charm of a soft focus. 
The beautiful legs, slanting down from the chair’s arm in the center 
of his vision, annoyed him; they spoiled the rest of bis estimate. 

She remained silent, he was forced to ask. “Did you decide to 
order it just like that, on the spur of the moment, over a telephone?” 

“1 decided it six months ago. 1 was waiting for Hank Rearden to 
gel ready to go into production.” 

“Don’t call him Hank Rearden. It's vulgar.” 

“That’s what everybody calls him. Don’t change the subject.” 

“Why did you have to telephone him last night?” 

“Couldn’t reach him sooner.” 

“Why didn’t you wait until you got back to New York and — ” 

“Because I had seen the Rio Norte Line.” 

“Well, I need time to consider it, to place the matter before the 
Board, to consult the best — ” 

“There is no tune.” 

“You haven't given me a chance to form an opinion.” 

“I don’t give a damn about your opinion. 1 am not going to argue 
with you, with your Board or with your professors. You have a 
choice to make and you’re going to make it now. Just say yes or no.” 

“That’s a preposterous, high-handed, arbitrary way of — ” 

“Yes or no’”’ 

“’Unit's the trouble with you. You always make if 'Yes’ or ‘No.’ 
Things are never absolute like that. Nothing is absolute.” 

“Metal rails are. Whether we get them or not, is.” 

She waited. He did not answer. 

“Well 9 ” she asked. 

“Are you taking the responsibility for it?” 

“1 am.” 

“Go ahead,” he said, and added, “but at your own risk. I won't 
cancel it, but 1 won’t commit myself as to what FU .say to the Board.” 

“Say anything you wish.” 


29 



She rose to go He leaned forward across the desk, reluctant to 
end the interview and to end it so decisively 
“You realize, of course, that a lengthy procedure will he necessary 
to put this through," he said, the words sounded almost hopeful “It 
isn't as simple as that " 

“Oh sure " she said * I’ll send you a detailed report, which bddit 
will prepare and which you won’t read bddie will help you put it 
through the works I'm going to Philadelphia tonight to see Reardtn 
He and I have a lot ot work to do ’ She added It’s as simple as 
that, Jim 

She had turned to go when he spoke again and what he said 
seemed bewildcnngly irrelevant 1 hat’s all light for vou because 
you’re lucky Others can t do it 
Do what> 

‘Other people arc human They re sensitive Ihev cant devote 
their whole lift to metals and engines You rt lucky vou vc never 
had anv feelings You ve ntvu fell mylhing it all 
As she looked at him hei dark gray eyes went slowly liom as 
tonishment to stillness then to a strange expression that tesenibltd 
a look ot weariness except that it seemed to reflect much more thin 
the endurance of this one moment 

No fim she said quietly 1 guess 1st nevtt tv.lt anything it 

all ’ 

Lddie Wiliers follow* d her to hei office Whcntvcr she icturncd 
he lelt as if the world became cleir simple e is\ to Dec ind he 
forgot his moments of shapeless apprehension He w is the only per 
son who lound it completely n ilunl that she should Ik the Oper utng 
Vice presitlent ot a gr< it railroad even though she w is * worn in 
She had told him when he wis ten years old th it she would run 
the railroad some day It did ne>t astonish him now just is it hid 
not astonished htni that day in a clearing ot the woods 

When this entered her office when hi siw her sit down at the 
desk and glance at the memos he had lelt for ht r h< felt as he did 
in his ear when the motor caught on met the wheels could move 
forward 

He was about to leave her office when he renumbered t matter 
he had not reported Owen Kellogg ot the It rmmtl Division asktd 
me for an appomtmtnl to see sou he smd 
She looked up astonished lhat s funny I was going to send toi 
him Have him come up L want to see him 1 ddie she added 
suddenly, before 1 start tell thc fc m to get me Ayers of the Aye is 
Music Publishing company on the phone 

‘The Music Publishing Company^ he repiated incredulously 
‘Yes ITicrc s something 1 want to ask him 
When the voice of Mr Ayers courteously eager inquired of what 
service he could be to her she asked Can ypu ttll me whether 
Richard Halley has written a new piano concerto the Fifth > 

“A fifth concerto. Miss I aggarl 7 Why no of [course he h isn t 
‘Are you sure>’ 

“Quite sure. Miss Taggart He has not written anything for eight 

years " 


30 



“Is he still alive?’" 

“Why, yes — that is, I can’t say for certain, he has dropped out of 
public life entirely — but Pm sure we would have heard of it if he 
had died/’ 

“If he wrote anything, would you know about it?” 

“Of course. We would be the first to know, We publish all of his 
work. But he has stopped writing.” 

“I see. Thank you." 

When Owen Kellogg entered her office, she looked at him with 
satisfaction. She was glad to see that she had been right in her vague 
recollection of his appearance— his face had the same quality as that 
of the young brakeman on the train, the face of the kind of man 
with whom she could deal. 

“Sit down, Mr. Kellogg.” she said, but he remained standing in 
tront ol her desk. 

“You had asked me once to let you know if I ever decided to 
change my employment. Miss Taggart,” he said. “So I came to tell 
you that I am quitting.” 

She had expected anything but that; it took her a moment before 
she asked quietly, “Why?” 

“For a personal reason.” 

“Were you dissatisfied here?” 

“No ” 

“Have vou received a better offer?” 

“No.” ' 

“What railroad are you going to?’ 

“Fm not going to any railroad. Miss Taggart ” 

“Then what job are you taking?” 

“I have not decided that yet " 

She studied him, feeling slightly uneasy, fhere was no hostility in 
his face; he looked straight at her, he answered simply, directly; he 
spoke like one who has nothing to hide, or to show; the face was 
polite and empty 

“Then why should you wish to quit?” 

“It s a personal matter.” 

“Are you ill? Is it a question of your health?” 

“No.” 

“Arc vou leaving the city?” 

“No.”' 

“Have you inherited money that permits you to retire?” 

“No.” 

“Do you intend to continue working lor a living?” 

“Yes.” 

“But you do not wish to work for Taggart Transcontinental?” 

“No ” 

“In that case, something must have happened here to cause your 
decision. What?” 

“Nothing, Miss Taggart.” 

“I wish you’d tell me. 1 have a reason for wanting to know.” 

“Would you take my word for it, Miss Taggart?” 

“Yes.” 


31 



"‘No person, matter or event connected with my job here had any 
bearing upon my decision." 

‘"You have no specific complaint against Taggart Tianscontinentaf?" 

“None." 

""Then 1 think you might reconsider when you hear what I have 
to offer you." 

"Tin sorry. Miss Taggart. I can’t." 

""May I tell you what 1 have in mind?" 

‘"Yes, if you wish." 

“Would you lake my word tor it that I decided to otter you the 
post I’m going to offer, before you asked to see me 7 l want you to 
know that." 

“I will always lake your word. Miss Taggart." 

“It’s the post of Superintendent of the Ohio Division. It’s yours, 
if you want it." 

His face showed no reaction, as if the words had no more signifi- 
cance for him than for a savage who had never heard ot railroads 

“I don't want it. Miss Taggart." he answered. 

After a moment, she said, her voice tight, "Write your own ticket, 
Kellogg. Name your price. 1 want you to slay l can match anything 
any other railroad offers you." 

""1 am not going to work for any other railroad." 

"*l thought you loved your work." 

This was the first sign of emotion in him, just a slight widening of 
his eyes and an oddly quiet emphasis in his voice when he answered, 
“1 do." 

“Then tell me what it is that 1 should say m order to hold you!" 

It had been involuntary and so obviously frank that he looked at 
her as if it had reached him. 

“Perhaps I am being unfair by coming here to tell you that Tm 
quitting. Miss Taggart. 1 know that you asked me to tell you because 
you wanted to have a chance to make me a counter-offer. So if l 
cam£, it looks as il I'm open to a deal. But I’m not. I came only 
because I ... I wanted to keep my word to you." 

That one break in his voice was like a sudden flash that told het 
how much her interest and her request had meant to him; and that 
his decision had not been an easy one to make. 

“Kellogg, is there nothing 1 can offer you?" she asked. 

“Nothing, Miss Taggart. Nothing on earth." 

He turned to go. For the first time in her hie, she felt helpless 
and beaten. 

“Why?" she asked, not addressing him. 

He stopped. He shrugged and smiled— he was alive for a moment 
and it was the strangest smile she had ever seen: i{ held secret amuse- 
ment, and heartbreak, and an infinite bitterness. ’He answered: 

“Who is John Galt?" 


32 



Chapter II THE CHAIN 

Jt began with a few lights. As a train of the Taggart line rolled 
toward Philadelphia, a few brilliant, scattered lights appeared in the 
darkness; they seemed purposeless in the empty plain, yet too power- 
ful to have no purpose. The passengers watched them idly, without 
interest. 

The black shape of a structure came next, barely visible against 
the sky, then a big building, close to the tracks; the building was 
dark, and the reflections of the train lights streaked across the solid 
glass of its walls. 

An oncoming freight train hid the view, filling the windows with 
a rushing smear of noise. In a sudden break above the flat cars, the 
passengers saw distant structures under a faint, reddish glow in the 
sky: the glow moved in irregular spasms, as if the structures were 
breathing. 

When the freight train vanished, they saw angular buildings 
wrapped in coils of steam. The rays of a few strong lights cut straight 
sheafs through the coils. The steam was red as the sky. 

The thing that came next did not look like a building, but like a 
shell of checkered glass enclosing girders, cranes and trusses in a 
solid, blinding, orange spread of flame. 

The passengers could not grasp the complexity of what seemed to 
be a city stretched for miles, active without sign of human presence. 
They saw towers that looked like contorted skyscrapers, bridges 
hanging in mid-air, and sudden wounds spurting fire from out of 
solid walls. They saw a line of glowing cylinders moving through the 
night; the cylinders were red-hot metal. 

An olfice building appeared, close to the tracks. The big neon sign 
on its roof lighted the interiors of the coaches as they went by. It 
said: Rr ardi n suit. 

A passenger, who was a protessor of economics, remarked to his 
companion: '‘Of what importance is an individual in the titanic col- 
lective achievements of our industrial age?” Another, who was a 
journalist, made a note for future use in his column; “Hank Rearden 
is the kind of man who sticks his name on everything he touches. 
You may, from this, form your own opinion about the character of 
Hank Rearden.” 

The train was speeding on into the darkness when a red gasp shot 
to the sky from behind a long structure. 'The passengers paid no 
attention: one more heat ol steel being poured was not an event 
they had been taught to notice. 

ft was the first heat for the first order of Rearden Metal. 

To the men at the tap-hole of the furnace inside the mills, the first 
break of the liquid metal into the open came as a shocking sensation 
of morning. The narrow streak pouring through space had the pure 
white color of sunlight. Black coils of steam were boiling upward, 
streaked with violent red. Fountains of sparks shot in beating spasms, 

33 



as from broken arteries. The air seemed torn to rags, reflecting a 
raging flame that was not there, red blotches whirling and running 
through space, as if not to be contained within a man-made structure, 
as if about to consume the columns, the girders, the bridges of cranes 
overhead. But the liquid metal had no aspect of violence. It was a 
long white curve with the texture of satin and the friendly radiance 
of a smile, it flowed obediently through a spout of clay, with two 
brittle borders to restrain it, it fell through twenty feet of space, 
down into a ladle that held two hundred tons* A flow of stars hung 
above the stream, leaping out of its placid smoothness, looking deli- 
cate as lace and innocent as children's sparkleis. Only at a closer 
glance could one notice that the white satin was boiling. Splashes 
flew out at times and fell to the ground below: they were metal and, 
cooling while hitting the soil, they burst into flame. 

Two hundred tons of metal which was to be harder than steel, 
running liquid at a temperature ol tour thousand degrees, had the 
power to annihilate every wall of the structure and every one ol the 
men who worked by the stream. But every inch of its course, every 
pound of its pressure and the content of every molecule within it. 
were controlled and made by a conscious intention that had worked 
upon it tor ten years. 

Swinging through the darkness of the shed, the red glare kept 
slashing the face of a man who stood in a distant corner; he stood 
leaning against a column, watching. The glare cut a moment’s wedge 
across his eyes, which had the color and quality of pale blue ice- 
then across the black web of the metal column and the ash-blond 
strands of his hair — then across the belt of his trenchcoat and the 
pockets where he held his hands. His body was tall and gaunt; he 
had always been too tall tor those around him. His face was cut 
by prominent cheekbones and by a tew sharp lines; they were not 
the lines of age, he had always had them: this had made him look 
old at twenty, and young now, at forty-five. Ever since he could 
remember, he had been told that his face was ugly, because it was 
unyielding, and cruel, because it was expressionless. It remained 
expressionless now, as he looked at the metal. He was Hank 
Rearden. 

The metal came rising to the lop of the ladle and went running 
over with arrogant prodigality. Then the blinding white trickles 
turned to glowing brown, and in one more instant they were black 
icicles of metal, starting to crumble off. The slag was crusting in 
thick, brown ridges that looked like the crust of the earth. As the 
crust grew thicker, a few craters broke open, with the white liquid 
still boiling within. 

A man came riding through the air, in the cab of a c^anc overhead. 
He pulled a lever by the casual movement ol one hand: steel hooks 
came down on a chain, seized the handles of thelladle, lifted it 
smoothly like a bucket of milk — and two hundred Umi of metal went 
sailing through space toward a row of molds waitingfto be filled. 

Hank Rearden leaned back, closing his eyes. He Belt the column 
trembling with the rumble of the crane. The job; was done, he 
thought. 


34 



A worker saw him and grinned in understanding, like a fellow 
accomplice in a great celebration, who knew why that taU, blond 
figure had had to be present here tonight. Rearden smiled in answer: 
it was the only salute he had received. Then he started back for his 
office, once again a figure with an expressionless face. 

It was late when Hank Rearden left his office that night to walk 
from his mills to his house. It was a walk of some miles through 
empty country, but he had felt like doing it, without conscious 
reason. 

He walked, keeping one hand in his pocket, his fingers closed 
about a bracelet. It was made of Rearden Metal, in the shape of a 
chain. His fingers moved, feeling its texture once in a while. It had 
taken ten years to make that bracelet. Ten years, he thought, is a 
long time. 

Hhe road was dark, edged with trees. Looking up, he could see a 
lew leaves against the stars: the leaves were twisted and dry, ready 
to fall. There were distant lights in the windows of houses scattered 
through the countryside: but the lights made the road seem lonelier. 

He never felt loneliness except when he was happy. He turned, 
once in a while, to look back at the red glow of the sky over the mills. 

He did not think of the ten years: What remained of them tonight 
was only a feeling which he could not name, except that it was quiet 
and solemn. The feeling was a sum, and he did not have to count 
again the parts that had gone to make it. But the parts, unrecalled, 
were there, within the feeling. They were the nights spent at scorch- 
ing ovens in the research laboratory of the mills— 

— the nights spent in the workshop of his home, over sheets of 
paper which he filled with formulas, then tore up in angry failure — 
— the days when the young scientists of the smaH staff he had 
chosen to assist him wailed for instructions like soldiers ready for a 
hopeless battle, having exhausted their ingenuity, still willing, but 
silent, with the unspoken sentence hanging in the air: “Mr. Rearden, 
it can’t be done--” 

— the meals, interrupted and abandoned at the sudden flash of a 
new thought, a thought to be pursued at once, to be tried, to be 
tested, to be worked on for months, and to be discarded as an- 
other failure — 

— the moments snatched from conferences, from contracts, from 
the duties of running the best steel mills in the country, snatched 
almost guiltily, as for a secret love — 

— the one thought held immovably across a span of ten years, 
under everything he did and everything he saw, the thought held in 
his mind when he looked at the buildings of a city, at the track of 
a railroad, at the light in the windows of a distant farmhouse, at the 
knife in the hands of a beautiful woman cutting a piece of fruit at 
a banquet, the thought of a metal alloy that would do more than 
steel had ever done, a metal that would be to steel what steel had 
been to iron — 

— the acts of self-racking when he discarded a hope or a sample, 
not permitting himself to know that he was tired, not giving himself 
lime to feel, driving himself through the wringing torture of: “not 

35 



good enough still not good enough ” and going on with no 
motor save the conviction that it could be done — 

— then the day when it was done and its result was called Rear 
den Metal — 

— these were the things that had come to white heat, had melted 
and fused within him, and their alloy was a strange, quiet feeling 
that made him smile at the countryside in l he darkness and wonder 
why happiness could hurt 

After a while, he realized that he was thinking of his past, as if 
certain days of it were spread before him, demanding to be seen 
again He did not want to look at them, he despised memories as a 
pointless indulgence But then he understood that he thought of 
them tonight in honor of that piece of metal in his pocket Then he 
permitted himself to look 

He saw the day when he stood on a rocky ledge and felt a thread 
of sweat running from his temple down Ins neck He was fouiteen 
years old and it was his fust day of work in the iron mines of Mmnc 
sota He was trying to learn to breathe against the scalding pam m 
his chest He stood, cursing himself, because he had made up his 
mind that he would not be tired Alter a while he went back to his 
task, he decided that pain was not a valid reason for stopping 

He saw the day when he stood at the window of his office and 
looked at the mines he owned them as of that morning He was 
thirty years old What had gone on in the years between did not 
matter, just as pain had not mattered He had worked in mines in 
foundries in the steel mills of the north moving toward the purpose 
he had chosen All he remembered of those jobs was that the men 
around him had never seemed to know what to do while he had 
always known He remembered wondering why so many iron mines 
were closing, just as these had been about to close until he took 
them over He looked at the shelves of rock m the distance Workers 
were putting up a new sign above a gate at the end of a road 
Rearden Ore 

He saw an evening when he sat slumped across his desk in that 
office It was late and his staff had left so he aiuld he there alone 
unwitnessed He was tired It was as if he had run a race against his 
own body, and all the exhaustion of years which he had refused to 
acknowledge, had caught him at once and Battened him against the 
desk top He felt nothing, except the desire not to move He did not 
have the strength to feel -not even to suffer He had burned every 
thing there was to burn withm him, he had scattered so many sparks 
to start so many things- and he wondered whether someone could 
give him now the spark he needed now when he felt unable ever 
to rise again He asked himself who had started him and kept him 
going Then he raised his head Slowly, with the greatest effort of 
his life, he made his body rise until he was able to lit upright with 
only one hand pressed to the desk and a trembling $irm to support 
him He never asked that question again . 

He saw the day when he stood on a hill and looked at a grimy 
wasteland of structures that had been a steel plan$, It was closed 
and given up. He had bought it the night before Thejre was a strong 

36 



wind and a gray light squeezed from among the ctouds. In that light, 
he saw the brown-red of rust, like dead blood, on the steel of the 
giant cranes — and bright, green, living weeds, like gorged cannibals, 
growing over piles of broken glass at the foot of walls made of empty 
frames. At a gate in the distance, he saw the black silhouettes of 
men. They were the unemployed from the rotting hovels of what 
had once been a prosperous town. They stood silently, looking at 
the glittering car he had left at the gate of the mills; they wondered 
whether the man on the hill was the Hank Rearden that people were 
talking about, and whether it was true that the mills were to be 
reopened. “The historical cycle of steel-making in Pennsylvania is 
obviously running down,'’ a newspaper had said, ‘'and experts agree 
that Henry Rearden's venture into steel is hopeless. You may soon 
witness the sensational end of the sensational Henry Rearden.” 

That was ten years ago. Tonight, the cold wind on his face felt 
like the wind of that day. He turned to look back. The red glow of 
the mills breathed in the sky, a sight as life-giving as a sunrise. 

These had been his stops, the stations which an express had 
reached and passed. He remembered nothing distinct of the years 
between them; the years were blurred, like a streak of speed. 

Whatever it was, he thought, whatever the strain and the agony, 
they were worth it, because they had made him reach this day— this 
day when the first heat ot the first order of Rearden Metal had been 
poured, to become rails tor Taggart Transcontinental. 

He touched the biaeclct in his pocket. He had had it made from 
that first poured metal. It was for his wife 
As he touched it, he realized suddenly that be had thought of an 
a bsti action called “his wife"— not of the woman to whom he was 
married He felt a stab of i egret, wishing he had not made the brace- 
let. then a wave of self-reproach for the regret. 

He shook his head. This was not the time for his old doubts. He 
felt (hat he could forgive anything to anyone, because happiness was 
the greatest agent of purification. He felt certain that every living 
being wished him well tonight. lie wanted to meet someone, to face 
the first slrangci, to stand disarmed and open, and to say, “Look at 
me.” People, he thought, were as hungry for a sight of joy as he had 
always been — for a moment's relief from that gray load of suffering 
which seemed so inexplicable and unnecessary. He had never been 
able to understand why men should be unhappy* 

The daik road had risen imperceptibly to the top of the hill. He 
stopped and turned. The red glow was a narrow strip, far to the 
west. Above it, small at a distance of miles, the words of a neon 
sign stood written on the blackness of the sky: rfaroln siwjl 
He stood straight, as if before a bench of judgment He thought 
that in the darkness of this night other signs were lighted over the 
eountty: Rearden Ore— Rearden Coal— Rearden Limestone. He 
thought of the days behind him. He wished it were possible to light 
a neon sign above them, saying: Rearden Life. 

He turned sharply and walked on. As the road came closer to his 
house, he noticed that his steps were slowing down and that some- 
thing was ebbing away from his mood. He felt a dim reluctance to 

37 



enter his home, which he did not want to feel No, he thought, not 
tonight, they’ll understand it tonight But he did not know, he had 
never defined, what it was that he wanted them to understand 
He saw lights in the windows ol the living room, when he ap- 
proached his house The house stood on a hill, rising before him like 
a big white hulk it looked naked with a few semi colonial pillars 
for reluctant ornament, it had the cheerless look ol a nudity not 
worth revealing 

He was not certain whethei his wife noticed him when he t ntered 
the living room She sat by the fireplace, talking the curve of her 
arm floating m graceful emphasis of her words He heard a small 
break in her voice and thought that she had seen him but she 
did not look up and her sentence went on smoothly he could not 
be certain 

-but it s just that a man ol culture is bored with the alleged 
wonders ol purel\ matenal ingenuity she wis saving He simplv 
refuses to get txcited about plumbing 

I hen she turned her head looked at Rc lidtn in the shadows 
across the long room and hci aims spread gracefully like two swan 
necks bv her sides 

Why darhm> she said m a bnght tone of amusement isn l it 
too earlv to come home 7 Wasn t thtre some slae to sweep or inverts 
to polish } 

They all turned to him his mother his biother Philip and Paul 
Larkin their old friend 

lm sony he mswued 1 know 1 m late 
Don t say \ou re sorrv said his molht r You eould h tvo U L 
phoned He looked U her trying v iguelv to leniembei something 
You promised to be here lor dinner tonight 
Oh ihat s right 1 did Im sons Bui todiy u the mills wt 
poured— Hi slopped he did not know what made him unable to 
utter the one thine he had come home to say he iddcd only It s 
just that I forgot 

7 hat s what Mothei means said Philip 
4 Oh let him get his bearings he s not quilt hue yet he s still at 
the mills his wife said gaily Do t ike your coat off He»nrv ? 

Paul I^arkin was looking at hnn with the dt voted eyes of an inhib 
ited dog Hello Paul said Reardon Wh n did you get in*’ 

Oh I just hopped down on the five thirty five from New York 
Larkin was smiling m gratitude for tfie attention 
“ I rouble , 

Who hasn t got trouble thtse days* I at km s smile became re 
signed to indicate that the remark was merely philosophical But 
no, no special trouble this time I just thought 1 d drop in to sec you 
Hts wife laughed You ve disappointed hun, Paul She turned to 
Rearden ‘Is it an inferiority complex or a superiority one Henry 7 
Do you believe that nobody can want to see you just for vour own 
sake or do you believe that nobody can get altfig without your 
help 7 ” 

He wanted to utter an angry denial, but she w^s smiling at him 
as if this were merely a conversational joke, and hd had no capacity 

38 



for the sort of conversations which were not supposed to be meant, 
so he did not answer. He stood looking at her, wondering about the 
things he had never been able to understand. 

Lillian Rearden was generally regarded as a beautiful woman. She 
had a tall, graceful body, the kind that looked well in high-waisted 
gowns of the Empire style, which she made it a practice to wear. 
Her exquisite profile belonged to a cameo of the same period: its 
pure, proud lines and the lustrous, light brown waves of her hair, 
worn with classical simplicity, suggested an austere, imperial beauty. 
But when she turned full face, people experienced a small shock of 
disappointment. Her face was not beautiful. The eyes were the flaw: 
they were vaguely pale, neither quite gray nor brown, lifelessly empty 
of expression. Rearden had always wondered, since she seemed 
amused so often, why there was no gaiety in her face. 

“We have met before, dear/’ she said, in answer to his silent 
scrutiny, “though you don’t seem to be sure of it.” 

“Have you had any dinner, Henry?” his mother asked: there was 
a reproachful impatience in her voice, as if his hunger were a per- 
sonal insult to her. 

“Yes . . . No ... 1 wasn’t hungry.” 

4 Td better ring to have them — ” 

“No, Mother, not now, it doesn’t matter.” 

“That’s the trouble I’ve always had with you.” She was not looking 
at him, but reciting words into space. “It’s no use trying to do things 
for you, you don’t appreciate it. I could never make you eat 
properly.” 

“Henry, you work too hard,” said Philip. “It’s not good for you.” 

Rearden laughed. “1 like it,” 

“That's what you tell yourself. It's a form of neurosis, you know. 
When a man drowns himscll in work, it's because he’s trying to 
escape from something. You ought to have a hobby.” 

“Oh, Phil, for Christ’s sake!” he said, and regretted the irritation 
in his voice. 

Philip had always been in precarious health, though doctors had 
found no specific defect in his loose, gangling body. He was thirty- 
eight, but his chronic weariness made people think at times that he 
was older than his brother. 

“You ought to learn to have some fun,” said Philip. “Otherwise, 
you’ll become dull and narrow. Single-tracked, you know. You ought 
to get out of your little private shell and take a look at the world. 
You don’t want to miss life, the way you’re doing.” 

Righting anger, Rearden told himself that this was Philip’s form 
of solicitude. lie told himself that it would be unjust to feel resent- 
ment: they were all trying to show their concern for him — and he 
wished these were not the things they had chosen for concern. 

“1 had a pretty good time today, Phil,” he answered, smiling — and 
wondered why Philip did not ask him what it was. 

He wished one of them would ask him. He was finding it hard to 
concentrate. The sight of the running metal w'as still burned into his 
mind, filling his consciousness, leaving no room for anything else. 

“You might have apologized, only 1 ought to know better than to 

39 



expect it.* 5 It was his mother's voice; he turned, she was looking at 
him with that injured look which proclaims the long-bearing patience 
of the defenseless 

“Mrs Beacham was heie for dinner* ’ she said reproachfully 
“What’’’ 

“Mis Beacham My triend Mis Beacham 
‘Yes 7 

“I told you about her I told you many times but you never re 
member anything l say Mis Beacham was so anxious to meet you, 
but she had to leave after dinnu. she couldn't wait Mrs Beacham 
is a veiy busy peison She wanted so much to tell you about the 
wonderful work we’re doing in our parish school, and about the 
classes m metal craftsmanship, and about the beautiful wi ought-uon 
doorknobs that the little slum children are making all by them- 
selves ’ 

It took the whole of his sense ot consideration to tora himself to 
answer evenly, *Tm sorry if l disappointed you. Mot he i ” 

‘You’re not sorry You could ve been here if you d made the 
ellori But when did you ev< r make an ettoit tor anybody but voui 
self 0 You ic not interested in any of us 01 m <ui) thing w< do You 
think if you pay the bills, that’s enough, don t you 7 Money 1 I hat s 
all you know And all you give us is money Have you tver given 
us any time 7 ' 

If this meant that she missed him, he thought, then it meant af- 
fection and if it meant attection, then he was unjust to experience 
a heavy, murky feeling which kept him silent lest his voice betray 
that the feeling was disgust 

‘ You don t care hei voice wc nt half spitting half begging on 
Lillian needed you today tor a very important problem but I told 
her it was no use waiting to discuss u with you 

Oh, Mother, it’s not lmpoitant 1 said Lillian Not to Henry ’ 
He turned to her He stood m the middle of the room, with his 
irencheoat still on, as it he were trapped in an unreality that would 
not become real to him 

‘its not important at all,’ said Lillian gaily, he could not tell 
whether her voice was apologetic or boasttul ‘it’s not business It s 
purelv non-commercial ” 

“What is it‘ 7 ’ 

“Just a party I’m planning to give ’ 

“A party' 7 ’ 

“Oh, don t look frightened, it’s not for tomorrow night I know 
that you’re so very busy, but it\ for three months from now and I 
want it to be a very big, very special affair, so would you promise 
me to be here that night and not m Minnesota or Colorado or 
California 7 ” t 

5>he was looking at him m an odd manner, speaking too lightly 
and too purposefully at once, her smile overstrcssfcng an air of inno- 
cence and suggesting something like a hidden trufnp card 
“Three months from now 7 ” he said “But you?know that 1 can’t 
tell what urgent business might come up to call n|e out of town.” 
“Oh, I know 1 But couldn’t I make a formal appointment with 

40 



you, way in advance, just like any railroad executive, automobile 
manufacturer or junk — I mean, scrap— dealer? They say you never 
miss an appointment Of course, I’d Jet you pick the date to suit 
your convenience.” She was looking up at him, her glance acquiring 
some special quality of feminine appeal by being sent from under 
her lowered forehead up toward his full height; she asked, a little 
too casually and too cautiously, “The date I had in mind was Decem- 
ber lenth, but would you prefer the ninth or the eleventh?” 

“It makes no difference to me.” 

vShe said gently, “December tenth is our wedding anniversary, 
Henry.” 

They were all watching his face; if they expected a look of guilt, 
what they saw, instead, was a faint smile of amusement. She could 
not have intended this as a trap, he thought, because he could escape 
it sr> easily, by refusing to accept any blame for his forgetfulness and 
by leaving her spumed; she knew that his feeling for her was her 
only weapon. Her motive, he thought, was a proudly indirect attempt 
to test his teeling and to confess her own. A party was not his form 
o! celebration, but it was hers. It meant nothing in his terms; in hers, 
it meant the best tribute she could offer to him and to their marriage. 
He had to respect her intention, he thought, even it he did not share 
her standards, even if he did not know whether he still cared for 
any tribute from her. He had to let her win, he thought, because she 
had thrown herself upon his mercy. 

He smiled, an open, un resentful smile in acknowledgment of her 
victory. “All right, Lillian,” he said quietly, “f promise to be here 
on the night of December tenth.” 

“Thank you, dear.” Her smile had a closed, mysterious quality; he 
wondered why he had a moment's impression that his attitude had 
disappointed them all. 

If she trusted him, he thought, it her feeling for him was still alive, 
then he would match her trust. He had to say it; words were a Jens 
to focus one's mind, and — he could not use words for anything else 
tonight. 'Tm sorry I'm late, Lillian, but today at the mills we poured 
the first heat of Rearden Metal.” 

There was a moment of silence. Then Philip said, “Well, that’s 
nice.” 

The others said nothing. 

He put his hand in his pocket. When he touched it. the reality of 
the bracelet swept out everything else; he felt as he had felt when 
the liquid metal had poured through space before him, 

“I brought you a present, Lillian,” 

He did not know that he stood straight and that the gesture of his 
arm was that of a returning crusader offering his trophy to his love, 
when he dropped a small chain of metal into her lap. 

Lillian Rearden picked it up, hooked on the tips of two straight 
fingers, and raised it to the light. Hie links were heavy, crudely made, 
the shining metal had an odd tinge, it was greenish-blue. 

“What’s that?” she asked, 

“The first thing made from the first heat of the first order of 
Rearden Metal.” 


41 



u You mean/' she $md, “it’s fully as valuable as a piece of rail- 
road rails'*” 

He looked at her blankly 

She jingled the bracelet, making it sparkle under the light ‘Henry, 
it's perfectly wonderful 1 What originality’ I shall be the sensation of 
New York, wearing jewelry made of the same stuff as bridge gilders 
truck motors, kitchen stoves typewriters, and- what was it you were 
saving about it the other dav darling 9 — soup kettles 
“God Hcnr\ but you’re conceited 1 ” said Philip 
Lillian laughed 4 He’s a sentimentalist All men are But, darling, 
1 do appreciate it It isn't the gift, it’s the intention, I know ” 

“Fhe intention's plain selfishness, if you ask me,” said Rearden’s 
mother “Another man would bnng a diamond bracelet, if he wanted 
to give his wife a present because it’s her pleasure he d think of, 
not his own But Henry thinks that just because he s made a new 
kind of tin why its got to be moie precious than diamonds to 
everybody, just because it’s he that’s made it That's the wav he s 
been since he was live years old- the most conceited brat you ever 
saw — and I knew he’d grow up to be the most sclhsh creature on 
God's earth ” 

“No, it s sweet ” said Lillian 4 It's charming ’ She dropped the 
bracelet down on the table She got up, put her hands on Reardon s 
shoulders, and raising herself on tiptoe kissed him on the cheek 
saying “I hank \ou dear' 

He did not move did not bend his head down to her 
After a while he turned took oft his coat and sat down by the hie 
apart trom the others He felt nothing but an immense exhaustion 
He did not listen to thur talk He heard dimlv that Lillian was 
arguing delendtng him against hts mother 

‘I know him better than \ou do his mother was saying Hank 
Rearden’s not interested in man beast or weed unless it s tied in 
some way to himself and his work That’s all he cares about I’ve 
tried m\ best to teach him some humility I ve tried all my life but 
I’ve tailed ” 

He had offered his mother unlimited means to live as and wheie 
she pleased he wondered why she had insisted that she wanted to 
live with him His suceess, he had thought, meant something to her, 
and if it did then it was a bond between them the only kind of 
bond he reeogni7ed if she wanted a place in the home of her success 
ful son, he would not deny it to her 
“fl's no use hoping to make a saint out of Henry Mother ’ said 
Philip 4 He wasn't meant to be one ” 

4 C)h but, Philip you’re wrong’” said I ilhan You’re so wrong’ 
Henry has all the makings of a saint 1 hat’s the trouble ” 

What did they seek from him * — thought Rearden—what were they 
after 9 He had never asked anything of them it was they who wished 
to hold him they who pressed a claim on him — and $ie claim seemed 
to have the form of affection, but it was a form *which he found 
harder to endure than any sort of hatred He despised causeless 
affection, just as he despised unearned wealth T$ey professed to 
love him for some unknown reason and they ignored all the things 

42 



for which he could wish to be loved. He wondered what response 
they could hope to obtain from him in such maimer— if his response 
was what they wanted. And it was, he thought; else why those con- 
stant complaints, those unceasing accusations about his indifference? 
Why that chronic air of suspicion, as if they were waiting to be hurt? 
He had never had a desire to hurt them, but he had always felt 
their defensive, reproachful expectation; they seemed wounded by 
anything he said, it was not a matter of his words or actions, it was 
almost . . . almost as if they were wounded by the mere fact of his 
being. Don’t start imagining the insane — he told himself severely, 
struggling to face the riddle with the strictest of his ruthless sense 
of justice. He could not condemn them without understanding; and 
he could not understand. 

Did he like them? No, he thought; he had wanted to like them, 
which was not the same. He had wanted it in the name of some 
unstated potentiality which he had once expected to sec in any 
human being He felt nothing for them now, nothing but the merci- 
less zero of indifference, not even the regret of a loss. Did he need 
any person as part of his life <? Did he miss the feeling he had wanted 
to tee!? No, he thought. Had he ever missed it? Yes, he thought, in 
his youth; not any longer. 

His sense of exhaustion was growing; he realized that it was bore- 
dom. He owed them the courtesy of hiding it, he thought— and sat 
motionless, lighting a desire tor sleep that was turning into physi- 
cal pain. 

His eyes were closing, when he felt two soft, moist fingers touching 
his hand: Paul Larkin had pulled a chaii to his side and was leaning 
over tor a private conversation. 

"I don't care what the industry says about it. Hank, you’ve got a 
great product in Rcarden Metal, a great product, it will make a 
fortune, like everything you touch." 

"Yes," said Reardon, “it will." 

"1 just. ... I just hope you don't run into trouble." 

"What trouble?" 

“Oh, I don't know . . the way things are nowadays . . there’s 
people, who . . but how can we tell? , . . anything can happen . . 

"What trouble?" 

Larkin sat hunched, looking up with his gentle, pleading eyes. His 
short, plumpish figure always seemed unprotected and incomplete, 
as if he needed a shell to shrink into at the slightest touch. His 
wistful eyes, his lost, helpless, appealing smile served as substitute 
for the shell. The smile was disarming, like that of a boy who throws 
himself at the mercy of an incomprehensible universe. He was fifty- 
three years old. 

"Your public relations aren’t any too good. Hank," he said. 
"You’ve always had a bad press." 

"So what?” 

“You’re not popular. Hank.” 

“I haven't heard any complaints from my customers." 

“Thai’s not what I mean. You ought to hire yourself a good press 
agent to sell you to the public." 


43 



“What for ? It’s steel that I’m selling ” 

“But you don’t want to have the public against you Public opin- 
ion, you know— it can mean a lot “ 

“I don’t think the public’s against me And I don’t think that it 
means a damn, one way or anothei ” 

“The newspapers are against you ” 

“They have time to waste I haven t ” 

“1 don’t like it, Hank It’s not good ’ 

“What > ’ 

‘What they wiite about you “ 

“What do they write about me 

“Well you know the stuff I hat you re intractable lhat you’re 
ruthless lhat you won’t allow anyone any voice in the running of 
your mills That your onlv goal is to make steel and to make money 
“But that is my only goal ” 

But vou shouldn’t say it ’ 

“Whv not } What is it l m supposed to say }> 

Oh I don t know But your mills — 

“Thev’re my mills aren t they* ’ 

4 Yes but -but you shouldn t remind people ot that too loudl\ 

You know how it is nowadays lhey think that youi attitude is 
anti-sou il 

‘I don t give a damn what they think ’’ 

Paul Larkin sighed 

What s the matter P-tuI* What are vou duvmg <il } 

“Nothing nothing in particular Only one nevtr knows what 
can happen m times like these One has to be so caieful 
Reardon chuckled You rc not trying to worry about me arc 
yon } 

‘It’s just that 1 in voui friend Hank I m your friend You know 
how much I admire vou 

Paul l arkm had always been unlucky Nothing he touched ever 
came off quite well nothing ever quite failed or succeeded He was 
a businessman but he could not manage to remain for long m any 
one line of business At the moment he was struggling with a modest 
plant that manufactured mining equipment 

He had clung to Reardtn for veais in awed admiration He came 
for advice he asked for loans at limes but not often, the loans were 
modest and were always repaid though not always on time His 
motive m the relationship seemed to resemble the need of an anemic 
person who receives a kind ol living transfusion from the mere sight 
of a savagely overabundant vitality 
Watching Larkin’s efforts. Real den felt what he did when he 
watched an ant struggling undei the load of a malchstick It s so 
hard for him, thought Rearden and so easy tor me So he gave 
advice attention and a tactful patient interest whenever he <ould 
“I’m your fntnd, Hank ’ 

Rearden looked at him inquiringly 

Larkin glanced away, as if debating something i$ his mind After 
a while, he asked cautiously “How is your man m Washington?” 
“Okay. I guess ’ 


44 



“You ought to be sure of it. It's important.” He looked up at 
Rearden, and repeated with a kind of stressed insistence, as if dis* 
charging a painful moral duty, “Hank, it’s very important/’ 

“l suppose so.” 

“In fact, that’s what I came here to tell you.” 

“For any special reason?” 

Larkin considered it and decided that the duty was discharged. 
“No,” he said. 

Rearden disliked the subject. He knew that it was necessary to 
have a man to protect him from the legislature; all industrialists had 
to employ such men. But he had never given much attention to this 
aspect of his business; he could not quite convince himself that it 
was necessary. An inexplicable kind of distaste, part fastidiousness, 
part boredom, stopped him whenever he tried to consider it. 

“Trouble is, Paul.” he said, thinking aloud, “that the men one has 
to pick for that job are such a crummy lot.” 

Larkin looked away. “That’s life,” he said. 

“Damned if 1 see why. Can you tell me that? What’s wrong with 
the world?” 

Larkin shrugged sadly. “Why ask useless questions? How deep is 
the ocean? How high is the sky? Who is John Galt?” 

Rearden sat up straight. “No,” he said sharply, “No. There’s no 
reason to feel that way.” 

He got up. His exhaustion had .gone while he talked about his 
business. He felt a sudden spurt of rebellion, a need to recapture 
and defiantly to reassert his own view' of existence, that sense of it 
which he had held while walking home tonight and which now 
seemed threatened m some nameless manner. 

He paced the room, his energy returning. He looked at his family. 
ITicy were bewildered, unhappy children — he thought— all of them, 
even his mother, and he was foolish to resent their ineptitude; it 
came from their helplessness, not from malice. It was he who had 
to make himself learn to understand them, since he had so much to 
give, since they could never share his sense of joyous, boundless 
power. 

He glanced at them from across the room. His mother and Philip 
were engaged in some eager discussion; but he noted that they were 
not really eager, they were nervous. Philip sat in a low chair, his 
stomach forward, his weight on his shoulder blades, as if the misera- 
ble discomfort of his position were intended to punish the onlookers. 

“What’s the matter. Phil?” Rearden asked, approaching him. 
“You look done in.” 

“I’ve had a hard day,” said Philip sullenly. 

“You’re not the only one who works hard,” said his mother. “Oth- 
ers have problems, too — even if they’re not billion-dollar, transsuper- 
continental problems like yours.” 

“Why, that’s good. 1 always thought that Phil should find some 
interest of his own.” 

“Good? You mean you like to see your brother sweating his health 
away? It amuses you* doesn’t it? I always thought it did. 

“Why, no. Mother, I’d Uke to help.” 

45 



“You don’t have to help You don’t have to feel anything for any 
of us ” 

Rearden had never known what his brother was doing or wished 
to do He had sent Philip through college, but Philip had not been 
able to decide on any specific ambition rhere was something wrong, 
by Rearden ’s standards, with a man who did not seek any gainful 
employment, but he would not impose his standards on Philip, he 
could afford to support his brother and never notice the expense 
Let him take it easy Rearden had thought for years, lei him have 
a chance to choose his career without the strain ot struggling tor 
a livelihood 

“What were you doing today, PhiP” he asked patiently 
“ft wouldn’t interest you * 

’It does interest me rhat’s why I m asking 
“I had to see twenty different people all over the place from here 
to Redding to Wilmington ’ 

‘What did you have to sec them about } 

‘I am trying to raise money tor 1 riends of Global Progress ’ 
Rearden had never been able to keep track of the many oigani/a 
tions to which Philip belonged nor to get a clear idea of their activi 
ties He had heard Philip talking vaguely about this one tor the last 
six months It seemed to be devoted to some sort of free lectures 
on psychology, folk music and co operative farming Rearden telt 
contempt for groups of that kind and saw no reason for a closer 
inquiry into their nature 

He remained silent Philip added without being prompted ‘We 
need ten thousand dollars for a vital progiam but it s a martyrs 
task trying to raise money Hicre’s not a speck of social conscience, 
left m people When 1 think ot the kind of bloated money bags 1 
saw today — whv they spend more than that on any whim, but I 
couldn’t squec/e just a hundred bucks apiece out ot them which 
was all I asked 1 hey have no sense of moral duty no What are 
you laughing at° he asked sharply Rearden stood before him 
grinning 

It was so childishly blatant thought Rearden so helpltssly crude 
the hint and the insult offered together It would be so casv to 
squash Philip by returning the insult he thought by returning an 
insult which would be deadly because it would be true- that he could 
not bring himself to utter it Surely, he thought, the pooi fool knows 
he’s at my mercy, knows he’s opened himself to be hurt so I don’t 
have to do it and my not doing it is inv best answer, which he won t 
be able to miss What sort of misery docs he really live in to get 
himself twisted quite so badly } 

And then Rearden thought suddenly that he could break through 
Philip’s chrontc wretchedness for once, give him $ shock of pleasure, 
the unexpected gratification of a hopeless desire. He thought What 
do I care about the nature of his desire?— it’s his just as Rearden 
Metal was mine — it must mean to him what that meant to me — let’s 
see him happy just once, it might teach him something — didn’t I say 
that happiness is the agent of purification 9 —I’m oelebratmg tonight, 
so let him share m it— it will be so much for him and so little for me 

46 



“Philip,” he said* smiling, “call Miss Ives at my office tomorrow. 
Shell have a check for you for ten thousand dollars.” 

Philip stared at him blankly; it was neither shock nor pleasure; it 
was just the empty stare of eyes that looked glassy. 

“Oh,” said Philip, then added, “We’ll appreciate it very much.” 
There was no emotion in his voice, not even the simple one of greed. 

Rearden could not understand his own feeling: it was as if some- 
thing leaden and empty were collapsing within him, he felt both the 
weight and the emptiness, together. He knew it was disappointment, 
but he wondered why it was so gray and ugly. 

“It’s very nice of you, Henry,” Philip said dryly. “Fm surprised. I 
didn’t expect it of you.” 

“Don't you understand it, Phil?” said Lillian, her voice peculiarly 
clear and lilting. “Henry’s poured his metal today." She turned to 
Rearden. “Shall we declare it a national holiday, darling?” 

“You’re a good man, Henry,” said his mother, and added, “but 
not often enough.” 

Rearden stood looking at Philip, as il waiting. 

Philip looked away, then raised his eyes and held Rearden’s 
glance, as if engaged in a scrutiny of his own. 

“You don’t really care about helping the underprivileged, do 
you?” Philip asked — and Rearden heard, unable to believe it, that 
the tone of his voice was reproachful. 

“No, Phil, I don’t care about it at all. I only wanted you to be 
happy.” 

“But that money is not for me. 1 am not collecting it for any 
personal motive. I have no selfish interest in the matter whatever.” 
His voice was cold, with a note of self-conscious virtue. 

Rearden turned away. He felt a sudden loathing: not because the 
words were hypocrisy, but because they were true; Philip meant 
them. 

“By the way, Henry,” Philip added, “do you mind if I ask you to 
have Miss Ives give me the money tn cash?” Rearden turned back 
to him, puzzled. “You see. Friends of Global Progress are a very 
progiessive group and they have always maintained that you repre- 
sent the blackest clement of social retrogression in the country, so 
it would embarrass us, you know, to have your name on our list of 
contributors, because somebody might accuse us of being in the pay 
of Hank Rearden.” 

He wanted to slap Philip’s face. But an almost unendurable con- 
tempt made him close his eyes instead. 

“All right,” he said quietly, “you can have it in cash.” 

He walked away, to the farthest window of the room, and stood 
looking at the glow of the mills in the distance. 

He heard Larkin’s voice crying after him, “Damn it. Hank, you 
shouldn’t have given it to him!” 

Then Lillian's voice came, cold and gay: “But you’re wrong, Paul, 
you're so wrong! What would happen to Henry’s vanity if he didn’t 
have us to throw alms to? What would become of his strength if he 
didn’t have weaker people to dominate? What would he do with 

47 



himself if he didn’t keep us around as dependents? Tt’s quite all 
right, really Tin not cntici/mg him, it s just a law ot human nature ” 
She took the metal bracelet and held it up, letting it glitter in 
the lamplight 

“A cham,” she said ‘‘Appropriate isn’t xO It’s the chain by which 
he holds us all in bondage ” 


Chapter HI THE TOP AND THE BOTTOM 

The ceiling was that of a cellar so heavy and low that people stooped 
when crossing the room, as if the weight of the vaulting rested on 
their shoulders The circular booths of dark red leather were built 
into walls of stone that looked eaten by age and dampness There 
were no windows only patches of blue light shooting from dents in 
the masonry the dead blue light proper for use in blackouts l he 
place was entered by way ol narrow steps that led down as if de 
scending deep under the ground This was the most expensive bar 
room in New York and it was built on the roof ot a skyscraper 

Four men sat at a table Raised sixty floors above the city they 
did not speak loudly as one speaks from a height in the freedom ot 
air and space they kept their voices low as befitted a cellar 

‘ Conditions and circumstances Jim said Orren Boyle C ondi 
tions and circumstances absolutely beyond human control We had 
everything mapped to roll those rails but unfoicseen developments 
set in which nobody could have prevented 11 you d only given us a 
chance, Jim 

Disunity drawled James Taggart ‘ seems to be the basic cause 
of all social problems My sister has a certain influence with a certain 
element among our stockholders Their disruptive tactics cannot al 
ways be defeated ’ 

‘ You said it Jim Disunity that’s the trouble Its my absolute 
opinion that in our complex industrial society no business enterprise 
can succeed without sharing the but den ot the problems ot other 
enterprises ’ 

Iaggart took a sip of hts dnnk and put it down again ‘1 wish 
they’d hre that bartender, he said 

“For instance, consider Associated Steel We vc got the most mod 
em plant in the country and the best organization that seems to 
me to be an indisputable fact, because we got the Industrial Effi 
ciency Awaid of Globe magazine last year So we can maintain that 
we ve done our best and nobody can blame us But wc cannot help 
it if the iron ore situation is a national problem We could not get 
the ore, Jim ’ 

Taggart said nothing He sat with his elbows spread wide on the 
table top The table was uncomfortably small, and this made it more 
uncomfortable for his three companions, but thqy did not seem to 
question his privilege 

“Nobody can get ore any longer,” said Boyle ’^Natural exhaustion 
of the mines, you know and the wearing out of equipment, and 

48 



shortages of materials, and difficulties of transportation, and other 
unavoidable conditions,*' 

‘The ore industry is crumbling. That’s what’s killing the mining 
equipment business,” said Paul Larkin. 

“It’s been proved that every business depends upon every other 
business,” said Orren Boyle. “So everybody ought to share the bur- 
dens of everybody else.” 

“That is, 1 think, true," said Wesley Mouch. But nobody ever paid 
any attention to Wesley Mouch. 

”My purpose,” said Orren Boyle, “is the preservation of a free 
economy. It’s generally conceded that free economy is now on trial 
Unless it proves its social value and assumes its social responsibilities, 
the people won't stand for it. If it doesn’t develop a public spirit, 
it’s done for. make no mistake about that.” 

Orren Boyle had appealed from nowhere, five years ago, and had 
since made the cover of every national news magazine. He had 
started out with a hundred thousand dollars of his own and a two- 
hundred-million-dollar loan from the government. Now he headed 
an enormous concern which had swallowed many smaller companies. 
This proved, he liked to say, that individual ability still had a chance 
to succeed in the world. 

“The only justification of private property," said Orren Boyle, “is 
public service,” 

“That is, 1 think, indubitable/' said Wesley Mouch. 

Orren Boyle made a noise, swallowing his liquor. He was a large 
man with big, virile gestures; everything about his person was loudly 
full of life, except the small black slits of his eyes. 

“Jim.” he said, “Rearden Metal seems to be a colossal kind of 
swindle.” 

“Uh-huh” said Taggart. 

T hear there’s not a single expert who’s given a favorable report 
on it/’ 

“No, not one/’ 

“We've been improving steel rails for generations, and increasing 
their weight. Now, is it true that these Rearden Metai rails are to 
be lighter than the cheapest grade ot steel?” 

“That’s right," said Taggart. “Lighter.” 

“But it’s ridiculous, Jim. It's physically impossible. For your heavy- 
duty, high-speed, main-hne track?” 

“That’s right.” 

“But you’re just inviting disaster.” 

“My sister is.” 

Taggart made the stem of his glass whirl slowly between two fin- 
gers. There was a moment of silence. 

“The National Council of Metal Industries,” said Orren Boyle, 
“passed a resolution to appoint a committee to study the question of 
Rearden Metal inasmuch as its use may be an actual public hazard.” 

“That is, in my opinion, wise/’ said Wesley Mouch. 

“When everybody agrees/' Taggart’s voice suddenly went shrill, 
“when people are unanimous, how does one man dare to dissent? 
By what right? That’s what 1 want to know— by what right?” 

49 



Boyle's eyes darted to Taggart's face, but the dim light of the 
room made it impossible to see faces dearly he saw only a pale, 
bluish smear 

“When we think ot the natural resources, at a time of critical 
shortage/' Boyle said softly, “when we think of the critical raw mate- 
rials that are being wasted on an irresponsible pm ate experiment* 
when we think ot the ore " 

He did not finish He glanced at laggart again But Taggart 
seemed to know that Boyle was waiting and to find the silence 
enjoyable 

“The public has a vital stake in natural resources, Jim such as 
iron ore The public can't remain indifferent to reckless selfish waste 
by an anti-social individual Alter all, private property is a trusteeship 
held for the benefit of society as a whole “ 
laggart glanced at Boyle and smiled the smile was pointed it 
seemed to say that something in his words was an answer to some 
thing in the words of Bovle ‘ The liquor they serve here is swill I 
suppose thats the price we have to pay tor not being crowded b\ 
ail kinds of rabble But I do wish thev’d recognize that they're deal- 
ing with experts Since I hold the purse strings. I expect to get my 
money’s worth and at my pleasure ” 

Boyle did not answer his face had become sullen 4 L isten 
Jim ’ he began heavily 

laggart smiled * What> I’m listening” 

“Jim, you will agree, I'm sure, that there s nothing more destine 
tive than a monopoly 

‘Yes," said Taggart, on the one hand On the other there s the 
blight of unbridled competition 

“Thai’s true That s very true Hie proper course is always m mv 
opinion in the middle So it is l think, the duty of society to snip 
the extremes now isn’t it > 

‘Yes " said Taggart ‘ it is * 

“j( onsider the picture m the iron-ore business l he national output 
seems to be falling at an ungodly rate It threatens the existence of 
the whole steel industry Steel mills are shutting down all over the 
country Ihcrcs only one mining company that's lucky enough not 
to be affected by the general conditions Its output seems to be 
plentiful and always available on schedule But who gets the benefit 
of it 9 Nobody except its owner Would you siy that that's fair*" 

‘ No,’ said Taggart it isn’t fair ' 

“Most of us don’t own iron mines How can We compete with a 
man who s got a comer on God s natural Resources > Is it any wonder 
that he can always delivci steel while wc have to struggle and wait 
and lose our customers and go out of business > Is it in the public 
interest to let one man destioy an entire industry } 

“No "said laggart “it isn’t ' 

“It seems to me that the national policy ought* to be aimed at the 
objective of giving everybody a chance at h*s fai|f share ot iron ore, 
with a view toward the preservation of the industry as a whole Don't 
you think so 7 " 

“I think so " 


50 



Boyle Mghed. Then he said cautiously, “But l guess there aren’t 
many people in Washington capable of understanding a progressive 
social policy ’* 

Taggart said slowly, “I here are No, not many and not easy to 
approach, but there are 1 might speak to them ” 

Boyle picked up his dnnk and swallowed it in one gulp, as if he 
had heard all he had wanted to hear 

“Speaking ot progressive policies, Orren,’ said laggart, ‘you 
might ask yourself whether at a time of transportation shortages, 
when so many railroads arc going bankrupt and large areas are left 
without rail service, whether it is in the public interest to tolerate 
wasteful duplication of sen ices and the destructive dog-eat-dog 
competition of newcomers in territories where established companies 
have histoucal priority 

* Well, now said Boyle pleasantly, that seems to be an interest- 
ing question to consider 1 might discuss it with a tew Inends in the 
National Alliance ol Railroads ’ 

‘ fnendships snd laggait in the lone of an idle abstiaction “are 
more valuable than gold Unexpectedly he turned to Larkm 

Don t you think so Paul } ’ 

Why yes, said I arkin istonishtd *\es of course 

I am counting on yours 

Huh > 

I am counting on vour mans tmndships 

they di , tuned to know why ! arkin did not mswer at once, his 
shoulders seemed to shnnk down closer to the table It everybody 
could pul! toi a common pui pose thin nooodv would have to be 
hurt’ ’ he uitd suddenly in i tone ot incongruous despair he* saw 
l iggatt watching him md added pleading 1 wish we dtdn t have 
to hurt anybody 

Hiat is an inti social attitude dr twled Taggart ‘People who 
ire all aid to sacrifice somebcHly ha\e no business talking about a 
common purpose 

But I m a student ot history said I arkin hastily l recognize 
historical necessity 

‘Good satd laggart 

1 can t lx expected to buck the trend ol the whole world can 
I ' T I arktn seemed to plead but the plea was not addievsed to any- 
one C an 1 } 

"\ou can t Mr l a* kin said Wesley Mouch “You and l arc not 
to be blamed, it we 

Larkm jerked hts head away, it was almost a shudder he could 
not bear to look at Mouch 

* 1 >id \ou have a good time in Mexico Oiicn* asked Taggart, 
his u>icc suddenly loud and casual All ot them seemed to know 
that the purpose o! then meeting was accomplished and whatever 
they had come here to understand was understood 

Wonderful place Mexico, Boyle answered cheerfully “Very 
stimulating and thought-provoking Their food tations are something 
awful, though f got sick But they're working mighty hard to put 
their country on its feet 


51 



“How are things down there**” 

“Pretty splendid it seems to me, pretty splendid Right at the 
moment however they’re But then what they’re aiming at is 
the future fhe People’s Slate of Mexico has a great future 7 hey ll 
beat us all in a few years ’ 

“Did you go down to the San Sebastian Mines 9 ” 

The tour figures at the table sat up slraighter and tighter all of 
them had inserted heavily in the stock of the San Sebastian Mines 
Boyle did not answei at once so that his voice seemed unexpected 
and unnaturally loud when it burst forth Oh sure certainly that’s 
what I wanted to see most * 

And ; 

And what } 

‘How are things going ’ 

‘Great Great ITiey must certainly have the biggest deposits of 
copper on earth down inside that mountain 1 
‘Did they seem to be busy* 

Newer saw such a busy place in inv life 
What were they busy doing’ 

Well you know with the kind of Spic superintendent they ha\e 
down there I eouldn l understand hall of wh it he was t liking about 
but they re certainly busy 

Any trouble ol any kind * 

Trouble’ Not at San Sebastian Its pnv lU property the last 
pitce ot it left in Mexico and tint does seem to mike a difference 
Orren laggail asked i mtiously wh it ibout those rumors that 
they re planning to nitionah/c the San Sebastian Mines > 

Slander said Boyle mgnlv plain vicious slandei 1 know it for 
ceitam 1 had dinner with the Minister of C ulture and lunches with 
all the rest of the bovs 

I here ought to be a law against irresponsible gossip said lag 
gai% sullenly I et s have another dunk 

He waved irritably at a waiter Jhcre was a small bar in a dark 
corner of the room where an old wi/encd bartender stood for long 
stretches of time without moving When called upon he moved with 
contemptuous slowness His job was that of sen ant to men s relax 
ation and pleasure but his manner was that of an embittered quack 
ministering to some guilty disc ise 
The four men sat in silence until the waiter returned with their 
dnnks Hie glasses he placed on the table were four spots ot famt 
blue glitter in the semi darkness like four fteble jets of gas flame 
Taggart reached lor his glass and smiled suddenly 

I et s drink to the sacrifices to historical necessity he snd look 
mg at Larkin 

There was a moments pause m i lighted ropm it would ha\t 
betn the contest of two men holding each othef s eyes hue they 
were merely looking at each other s eye sockets I hen l arkm picked 
up his glass 

‘ It’s my party boys ’ said 1 tggart as they drhnk 

Nobody found anything else to say until Boyle spoke up with 

52 



indifferent curiosity: “Say, Jim, I meant to ask you, what in hell’s 
the matter with your train-service down on the San Sebastian Line?” 

“Why, what do you mean? What is the matter with it?” 

“Well, 1 don’t know, but running just one passenger train a day 

is — ” 

“Owe train?” 

“ — is pretty measly service, it seems to me, and what a train! You 
must have inherited those coaches from your great-grandfather, and 
he must have used them pretty hard. And where on earth did you 
get that wood-burning locomotive?” 

“Wood-burning?” 

“That’s what I said, wood-burning. I never saw one before, except 
in photographs. What museum did you drag it out of? Now don’t 
act as if you didn’t know it, just tell me what’s the gag?'* 

“Yes. of course 1 knew it,” said Taggart hastily. “It was just . . . 
You just happened to choose the one week when we had a little 
trouble with our motive power- our new engines are on order, but 
there's been a slight delay —you know' what a problem we’re having 
with the manufacturer of locomotives — but it’s only temporary.” 

“Of course,” said Boyle. “Delays can’t be helped. It’s the strangest 
train I ever rode on. though. Nearly shook my guts out.” 

Within a few mmutes, they noticed that Taggart had become silent. 
He seemed preoccupied with a problem of his own. When he rose 
abruptly, without apology, they rose, too, accepting it as a command. 

Larkin muttered, smiling too strenuously, “It was a pleasure. Jim. 
A pleasure. 'Hiat’s how great projects are born- -over a drink with 
friends.” 

“Social reforms arc slow,” said faggait coldly. “It is advisable to 
be patient and cautious.” For the first time, he turned to Wesley 
Mouch. “What I like about you. Mooch, is that you don't talk too 
much.” 

Wesley Mouch was Rearden’s Washington man. 

lTicre was still a remnant ot sunset light m the sky, when Taggart 
and Boyle emerged together into the street below. The transition 
was faintly shocking to them — the enclosed barroom led one to ex- 
pect midnight darkness. A tall building stood outlined against the 
sky, sharp and straight like a raised sword. In the distance beyond 
it, there hung the calendar. 

Taggart fumbled irritably with his coat collar, buttoning it against 
the chill of the streets. He had not intended to go back to the office 
tonight, but he had to go back. He had to see his sister, 

”... a difficult undertaking ahead of us, Jim,” Boyle was saying, 
“a difficult undertaking, with so many dangers and complications and 
so much at stake . , 

“It all depends,” James Taggart answered slowly, “on knowing 
the people who make it possible. . . . That’s what has to be known — 
who makes it possible.” 

* * 

Dagny Taggart was nine years old when she decided that she 
would run the Taggart Transcontinental Railroad some day. She 
stated it to herself when she stood alone between the rails, looking 

53 



at the two straight lines of steel that went off into the distance and 
met m a single point What she felt was an arrogant pleasure at the 
way the track cut through the woods it did not belong :n the midst 
of ancient trees, among green branches that hung down to meet 
green brush and the lonely spears of wild flowers — but there it was 
The two steel hues were brilliant m the sun, and the black ties weic 
like the rungs of a ladder which she had to climb 

It was not a sudden decision, but only the final seal ot words upon 
something she had known long ago In unspoken understanding, as 
if bound by a vow it had never been necessary to take, she and 
Eddie Willers had given themselves to the railroad from the first 
conscious days of their childhood 

She felt a bored indifference toward the immediate world around 
her, toward other children and adults alike She took it as a regretta 
blc accident to be borne palientl) for a while, that she happened to 
be imprisoned among people who were dull She had caught a 
glimpse of another world and she knew that it existed somewhere 
the world that had created trains bridges telegraph wires and signal 
lights winking in the night She had to wait she thought, and grow 
up to that world 

She never tiled to explain why she liked the railroad Whatever it 
was that others felt she knew that this was one emotion for which 
the> had no equivalent and no response She felt the same emotion 
in school, in classes of mathematics the only lessons she liked She 
felt the excitement of solving problems the insolent delight of taking 
up a challenge and disposing of it without effort the eagerness to 
meet another, harder test She felt at the same lime a growing 
respect for the adveisary, tor a science that was so clean, so strict 
so lummousl) rational Studying mathematics, she felt, quite simpl) 
and at once How great that men have done this” and “How won- 
derful that I’m so good at it ’ It was the joy of admiration and of 
onels own ability growing together Her feeling for the railroad was 
the same worship of the skill that had gone to make it, of the 
mgenuit) of someone’s clean reasoning mind worship with a secret 
smile that said she would know how (o make it better some day 
She hung around the tracks and the round-houses like a humble 
student but the humility had a touch of future pride a pride to 
be earned 

“You’re unbearably conceited ” was one of the two sentences she 
heard throughout her childhood, even though she never spoke of 
her own ability The other sentence was “You’re selfish ” She asked 
what was meant, but never received an answer $he looked at the 
adults, wondering how they could imagine that slie would feel guilt 
from an undefined accusation 

She was twelve yeais old when she told Eddifc Willers that she 
would run the railroad when they grew up She \ias fifteen when it 
occurred to her tor the first time that women die! not run railroads 
and that people might object To hell with that, she thought— and 
never worried about it again 

She went to work for Taggart Transcontinental at the age of six- 
teen Her father permitted it he was amused add a little curious 

54 



She started as night operator at a smalt country station. She had to 
work nights for the first few years, while attending a college of 
engineering. 

James Taggart began his career on the railroad at the same time; he 
was twenty-one. He started in the Department of Public Relations. 

Dagny’s rise among the men who operated Taggart Transcontinen- 
tal was swift and uncontested. She took positions of responsibility 
because there was no one else to take them. There were a few rare 
men of talent around her, but they were becoming rarer every year. 
Her superiors, who held the authority, seemed afraid to exercise it, 
they spent their time avoiding decisions, so she told people what to 
do and they did it. At every step of her rise, she did the work long 
before she was granted the title. It was like advancing through empty 
rooms. Nobody opposed her, yet nobody approved of her progress. 

Her father seemed astonished and proud of her. but he said noth- 
ing and there was sadness in his eyes when he looked at her in the 
office. She was twenty-nine years old when he died. ‘'There has al- 
ways been a Taggart to run the railroad,*' was the last thing he said 
to her. He looked at her with an odd glance: it had the quality of a 
salute and of compassion, together. 

The controlling stock of Taggart Transcontinental was left to 
James Taggart. He was thirty-four when he became President ot the 
railroad. Dagny had expected the Board of Directors to elect him, 
but she had never been able to understand why they did it so eagerly. 
They talked about tradition, the president had always been the eldest 
son of the Taggart family; they elected James Taggart in the same 
manner as they refused to walk under a ladder, to propitiate the 
same kind of fear. They talked about his gift of "making railroads 
popular/’ his "good press,*’ his "Washington ability." He seemed 
unusually skillful at obtaining favors from the Legislature. 

Dagny knew nothing about the field of "Washington ability" or 
what such an ability implied. But it seemed to be necessary, so she. 
dismissed it with the thought that there were many kinds of work 
which were offensive, yet necessary, such as cleaning sewers; some- 
body had to do it, and Jim seemed to like it. 

She had never aspired to the presidency; the Operating Depart- 
ment was her only concern. When she went out on the line, old 
railroad men, who hated Jim, said, "There will always be a Taggart 
to run the railroad,” looking at her as her father had looked. She was 
armed against Jim by the conviction that he was not smart enough to 
harm the railroad too much and that she would always be able to 
correct whatever damage he caused. 

At sixteen, sitting at her operator's desk, watching the lighted win- 
dows of Taggart trains roll past, she had thought that she had entered 
her kind of world. In the years since, she learned that she hadn’t. The 
adversary she found herself forced to fight was not worth matching or 
beating; it was not a superior ability which she would have found 
honor in challenging; it was ineptitude — a gray spread of cotton that 
seemed soft and shapeless, that could offer no resistance to anything 
or anybody, yet managed to be a barrier in her way* She stood, 

55 



disarmed, before the riddle of what made this possible She could 
fmd no answer 

It was only in the first few years that she felt hcrselt screaming 
silently at times, for a glimpse of human ability a single glimpse of 
clean hard radiant competence She had fits of tortured longing for 
a fnend or an enetnv with a mind better than her own But the 
longing passed She had a job to do She did not have time to feel 
pain not often 

rhe first step of the policy that James laggart brought to the 
railroad was the construction of the San Sebastian L me Many men 
were responsible for it but to Dagny one name stood written across 
the venture a name that wiped out all others whenever she saw it 
It stood across five vcais of struggle across milts ot wasted track 
across sheets of figures that rtcorded the losses ot Taggart Iranscon 
tmental like a red trickle from a wound which would not heal as 
it stood on the ticker tape of every stock exchange lett m the world- 
as it stood on smokestacks m tht red glare of furnaces melting cop 
per — as it stood in scandalous headlines — as it stood on pirchmint 
pages recording the nobility of tht centuries— as it stood on cards 
attached to flowers m the boudoirs of women scattered through 
three continents 

The name was Iraneisco d Anconia 

At the age of twenty three when he inherited his fortune I ran 
cisco d Antonia had been famous as the copper king of the world 
Now at thirty six he was famous as the richest man and the most 
spectacularly worthless playboy on earth He was the last descendant 
of one of the noblest families ol Argentina Ht owned cattle ranches 
coffee plantations and most ol the copper mines ot f hile He owned 
half of South Ami nca and sundry mines scattered through the 
United States as small change 

When Francisco d’Anconia suddenly bought miles ot bare nioun 
tains an Mexico news leaked out that he had discovered vast deposits 
of copper He made no effort to sell stock in his venture the stock 
was begged out ol his hands and he merely chose those whom he 
wished to favor from among the applicants His financial talent was 
called phenomenal no om had ever beaten him m any transac tton— 
he added to his incredible fortune with cverv deal he touched and 
every step he made when he took the trouble to make it Those 
who censured him most were first to sei/c the chance of riding on 
his talent, toward a share of his new wealth James Taggart Orren 
Boyle and their friends were among the heaviest stockholders of the 
project which Francisco d Ancoma had named the San Sebastian 
Mines 

Dagny was never able to discover what influences prompted James 
Taggart to build a railroad branch from Texas the wilderness 
of San Sebastian it seemed likely that he did not f know it himself 
like a field without a windbreak he seemed opei$ to any current, 
and the final sum was made by chance A few amcing the Directors 
of Taggart Transcontinental objected to the project The company 
needed all its resources to rebuild the Rio Norte lane, it could not 

56 



do both. But James Taggart was the road’s new president. It was 
the first year of his administration. He won. 

The People’s Slate of Mexico was eager to co-operate, and signed 
a contract guaranteeing for two hundred years the property right of 
Taggart Transcontinental to its railroad line in a country where no 
property rights existed. Francisco d’Anconia had obtained the same 
guaranty for his mines. 

Dagny fought against the building of the San Sebastian Line. She 
fought by means of whoever would listen to her; but she was only 
an assistant in the Operating Department, too yourfg, without author- 
ity, and nobody listened. 

She was unable, then or since, to understand the motives of those 
who decided to build the line. Sitting as a helpless spectator, a minor- 
ity member, at one of the Board meetings, she felt a strange eva- 
siveness in the air of the room, in every speech, in every argument, 
as if the real reason of their decision were never stated, but clear to 
everyone except herself. 

They spoke about the future importance of the trade with Mexico, 
about a rich stream of freight, about the large revenues assured to 
the exclusive carrier of an inexhaustible supply of copper. They 
proved it by citing Francisco d’Anconia's past achievements. They 
did not mention any mineralogical facts about the San Sebastian 
Mines. Few facts were available; the information which d’Anconia 
had released was not very specific; but they did not seem to need 
facts. 

They spoke at great length about the poverty of the Mexicans and 
their desperate need of railroads. “They’ve never had a chance.” “It 
is our duty to help an underprivileged nation to develop. A country, 
it seems to me, is its neighbors’ keeper.” 

She sat, listening, and she thought of the many branch lines which 
Taggart Transcontinental had had to abandon; the revenues of the 
great railroad had been falling slowly for many years. She thought 
of the ominous need of repairs, ominously neglected over the entire 
system. Their policy on the problem of maintenance was not a policy, 
but a game they seemed to be playing with a piece of rubber that 
could be stretched a little, then a little more. 

“The Mexicans, it seems to me, are a very diligent people, crushed 
by their primitive economy. How can they become industrialized if 
nobody lends them a hand?” “When considering an investment, we 
should in my opinion, take a chance on human beings, rather than 
on purely material factors.” 

She thought of an engine that lay in a ditch beside the Rio Norte 
Line, because a splice bar had cracked. She thought of the five days 
when all traffic was stopped on the Rio Norte Line, because a re- 
taining wall had collapsed, pouring tons of rock across the track. 

“Since a man must think of the good of his brothers before he 
thinks of his own, it seems to me that a nation must think of its 
neighbors before it thinks of itself.” 

She thought of a newcomer called Ellis Wyatt whom people were 
beginning to watch, because his activity was the first trickle of a 
torrent of goods about to burst from the dying stretches of Colorado. 

57 



The Rio Norte Line was being allowed to run its way to a final 
collapse, just when its fullest efficiency was about to be needed 
and used. 

“Material greed isn’t everything. There are non-material ideals to 
consider.” ”1 confess to a feeling of shame when 1 think that we 
own a huge network of railways, while the Mexican people have 
nothing but one or two inadequate lines.” “The old theory of eco- 
nomic self-sufficiency has been exploded long ago. ll is impossible 
for one country to prosper in the midst of a starving world.” 

She thought that to make Taggart Transcontinental what it had 
been once, long betore her time, every’ available rail, spike and dollar 
was needed — and how desperately little of it was available. 

They spoke also, at the same session, in the same speeches, about 
the efficiency of the Mexican government that held complete control 
of everything. Mexico had a great future, they said, and would be- 
come a dangerous competitor in a tew years. “Mexico's got disci- 
pline,” the men of the Board kept saying, with a note of envy in 
their voices. 

James Taggart let it be understood — in unfinished sentences and 
undefined hints — that his friends in Washington, whom he never 
named, wished to see a railroad line built in Mexico, that such a line 
would be of great help in matters of international diplomacy, that 
the good will of public opinion of the world would more than repay 
Taggart Transcontinental for its investment. 

They voted to build the San Sebastian Line at a cost of thirty 
million dollars. 

When Dagny left the Board room and walked through the clean, 
cold air of the streets, she heaid two words repeated clearly, insis- 
tently in the numbed emptiness of her mind: Get out . . . Get out . , . 
Get out. 

She listened, aghast. The thought of leaving 1'aggart Transconti- 
nental did not belong among the things she could hold as conceiv- 
able. She felt terror, not at the thought, but at the question of what 
had made her think it. She shook her head angrily; she told herself 
that Taggart Transcontinental would now need her more than ever. 

Two of the Directors resigned; so did the Vice-President m Charge 
of Operation. He was replaced by a triend of James Taggart. 

Steel rail was laid across the Mexican desert — while orders were 
issued to reduce the speed of trains on the Rio Norte Line, be- 
cause the track was shot. A depot of reinforced concrete, with 
marble columns and mirrors, was built amidst the dust of an un- 
paved square in a Mexican village — while a train of tank cars car- 
rying oil went hurtling down an embankment and into a blazing junk 
pile, because a rail had split on the Rio Norte Line. Ellis Wyatt did 
not wait for the court to decide whether the accident was an act of 
God, as James Taggart claimed. He transferred the^hipping of his oil to 
the Phoenix -Durango, an obscure railroad which ^as small and strug- 
gling, but struggling well. This was the rocket th^t sent the Phoenix- 
Durango on its way. From then on, it grew, as Wyatt Oil grew, as 
factories grew tn nearby valleys — as a band of r^ls and ties grew, at 

58 



the rate of two miles a month, across the scraggly fields of Mexi* 
can corn. 

Dagny was thirty-two years old, when she told James Taggart that 
she would resign. She had run the Operating Department for the 
past three years, without title, credit or authority. She was defeated 
by loathing for the hours, the days, the nights she had to waste 
circumventing the interference of Jim’s friend who bore the title of 
Vice-President m Charge of Operation The man had no policy, and 
any decision he made was always hers, but he made it only after he 
had made eveiy effort to make it impossible. What she delivered to 
her brother was an ultimatum He gasped, ”But, Dagny, youTe a 
woman! A woman as Opeiating Vice President? It's unheard of! The 
Board won’t considei it!” 

“Then 1’rn through,” she answered. 

She did not think of what she would do with the rest of hei life. 
To face leaving Taggart Transcontinental was like waiting to ha\c 
her legs amputated' she thought she would let it happen, then take 
up the load of whatever was loll 

She nevei understood why the Board ot Directors voted unani- 
mously to make hci Vice-President in C’haige of Operation, 

It was she who finally gave them their San Sebastian line When 
she took o\ei the const luction had been under way lor three years, 
one third of its track was laid; the cost to date was beyond the 
authon/ed total She tired Jnn’s friends and lound a contractor who 
completed the job in one war 

I he San Sebastian l me was now' in operation. No surge of Bade 
had come across the bordei, noi any trains loaded with copper. A 
lew carloads came clattering down the mountains from San Sebas- 
tian, at long intervals. The mines, said Francisco d Anconia, were 
still in the piocess ot development. The drain on Taggart Transconti- 
nental had not stopped 

Now she sat at the desk in her office, as she had sat for many 
evenings, trying to work out the problem of what branches could 
save the system and in how many years. 

The Rio Norte l me, when rebuilt, would redeem the rest. As she 
looked at the sheets of figures announcing losses and more losses, 
she did not think of the long, senseless agony tit the Mexican venture. 
She thought of a telephone call. Hank, can you save us? Can you 
give us rail on the shortest notice and the longest credit possible?” 
A quiet, steady voice had answered. “Sure ” 

The thought was a point of support. She leaned over the sheets 
of paper on her desk, finding it suddenly easier to concentrate. There 
was one thing, at least, that could be counted upon not to crumble 
when needed. 

James Taggart crossed the anteroom of Dagny ’$ office, still holding 
the kind of confidence he had felt among his companions at the 
barroom half an hour ago. When he opened her door, the confidence 
vanished. He crossed the room to her desk like a child being dragged 
to punishment, storing the resentment for all his future years. 

He saw a head bent over sheets of paper, the light of the desk 

59 



lamp glistening on strands ot disheveled hair, a white shirt clinging 
to her shoulders, its loose tolds suggesting the thinness of her body 
“What is it, Jim*” 

“What are you trying to pull on the San Sebastian Line*” 

She raised her head “Pull* Why*” 

“What sort ot schedule are wc running down there and what kind 
of trams* 

She laughed, the sound was gay and a little weary “You really 
ought to read the reports sent to the president’s office, Jim, once in 
a while ” 

‘ What do you mean *” 

“We've been junning that schedule and those trams on the San 
Sebastian for the last three months ’ 

‘ One passenger tram a day *” 

“ — in the morning And one freight tram every other night ” 
“Good God* On an important blanch like that* 

“The important branch can t pav e\en for those two trams ’ 

“But the Mexican people expect real service from us* ’ 

‘ Pm sure they do ’ 

‘ They need trams*” 

‘Tor what*’ 

‘For To help them develop local mdustnes How do vou 
expect them to develop if we don t give them transportation*” 

‘ I don t expect them to develop ’ 

That’s just your personal opinion I don t see what right you had 
to take it upon \ourself to cut our schedules Why, the copper tiaffic 
alone will pay foi everything ” 

“When *’ 

He looked at her his face assumed the satisfaction of a person 
about to utter something that has the power to hurt ‘You don t 
dopbt the success of those copper mines, do you * when it’s Fran 
cisco d’Ancoma who s lunning them * He stressed the name, watch 
ing her 

She said. He mav be you? hi end, but 
* My friend* ! thought he was youis ’ 

She said steadily, ‘ Not for the last ten years ’ 

“That’s too bad, isn’t it 9 Still, he’s one of the smartest operators 
on earth He’s never failed in a venture— 1 mean, a business ven* 
turc — and he s sunk millions of his own money into those mines, so 
we can rtlv on his judgment ’ 

“When will you reah/e that Francisco d’Ancoma has turned into 
a worthless bum 9 ” 

He chuckled “1 always thought that that’s what he was— as far as 
his personal character is concerned But you didnft share my opinion 
Yours was opposite Oh my, how opposite* Sorely you icmcmber 
our quarrels on the subject 9 Shall I quote sonue of the things you 
said about him 9 I can only surmise as to some of'the things you did ” 
“Do you wish to discuss Francisco d’Antonift* Is that what you 
came here for 9 ” 

His face showed the anger of failure— because hers showed noth- 

60 



ing. “You know damn well whai I came here for!” he snapped. 4 Tve 
heard some incredible things about our trains in Mexico/’ 

“What things?” 

“What sort of rolling stock are you using down there?” 

“The worst 1 could find/' 

“You admit that?” 

“I've stated it on paper in the reports 1 sent you.” 

“Is it true that you’re using wood-burning locomotives?” 

“Eddie found them for me in somebody’s abandoned roundhouse 
down in Louisiana. He couldn’t even learn the name of the railroad.” 

“And that's what you're running as Taggart trains?” 

“Yes.” 

“What in hell’s the big idea? What’s going on? I want to know 
what’s going on!” 

She spoke evenly, looking straight at him. “If you want to know, 

1 have left nothing but junk on the San Sebastian Line, and as little 
of that as possible. I have moved everything that could be moved — 
switch engines, shop tools, even typewriters and mirrors— out of 
Mexico.” 

“Why in blazes?” 

"So that the looters won’t have too much to loot when they nation- 
alize the line.” 

He leaped to his leet “You won't get away with that! This is one 
time you won’t get away with it f To have the nerve to pull such a 
low. unspeakable . . just because of some vicious tumors, when we 
have a contract for two hundred yeais and 

“Jim.” she said slowly, “there’s not a car. engine or ton of coal 
that we can spare anywhere on the system.” 

“I won't permit it, I absolutely won't permit such an outrageous 
policy toward a friendly people who need our help Material greed 
isn't everything. After all. there aie non-material considerations, 
even though you wouldn't understand them!” 

She pulled a pad forward and picked up a pencil. “All right, Jim, 
How many trains do you wish me to run on the San Sebastian Line?” 

“Huh?” 

“Which runs do you wish me to cut and on which ol our lines — 
in order to get the Diesels and the steel coaches'*” 

“I don't want you to cut any runs!” 

“Then where do 1 get the equipment tor Mexico?” 

“That’s for you to figure out. It’s y our job ” 

“I am not able to do it. You will have to decide.” 

hat's your usual rotten trick — switching the responsibility to 

me!” 

“I’m waiting tor orders, Jim.” 

“I’m not going to let you trap me like that!” 

She dropped the pencil “Then the San Sebastian schedule will 
remain as it is.” 

“Just wait till the Board meeting next month. I'll demand a deci- 
sion, once and for all, on how far the Operating Department is to 
be permitted to exceed its authority. You're going to have to answer 
foi this/' 


61 



4 Til answer for it.” 

She was back at her work before the door had closed on Jajnes 
Taggart. 

When she finished, pushed the papers aside and glanced up, the 
sky was black beyond the window, and the city had become a glow- 
ing spread of lighted glass without masonry. She rose reluctantly. 
She resented the small defeat of being tired, but she knew that she 
was, tonight. 

The outer office was dark and empty; her staff had gone. Only 
Eddie Willers was still there, at his desk m his glass partitioned en- 
closure that looked like a cube of light in a corner of the large room. 
She waved to him on her way out 

She did not take the elevator to the lobby of the building, but to 
the concourse of the Taggart Terminal. She liked to walk through it 
on her way home. 

She had always felt that the concourse looked like a temple. 
Glancing up at the distant ceiling, she saw dim vaults supported by 
giant granite columns, and the tops of vast windows gla/ed by dark- 
ness. The vaulting held the solemn peace of a cathedral, spread in 
protection high above the rushing activity ol men. 

Dominating the concourse, but ignored by the travelers as a habit- 
ual sight, stood a statue of Nathaniel Taggart, the founder of the 
iailroad. Dagny was the only one who remained aware of it and had 
never been able to take it for granted. To look at that statue when- 
ever she crossed the concourse, was the only form at prayer she 
knew. 

Nathaniel Taggart had been a penniless adventurer who had come 
from somewhere in New r England and built a railroad across a conti- 
nent, in the days of the first steel rails. His railroad still stood; his 
battle to build it had dissolved into a legend, because people pre- 
ferred not to undei stand it or to believe it possible. 

He was a man who had never accepted the creed that others had 
the right to .stop him. He set his goal and moved toward it, his way 
as straight as one of his rails. He never sought any loans, bonds, 
subsidies, land grants or legislative favors from the government He 
obtained money fiom the men who owned it, going from door to 
door — from the mahogany doors ol bankers to the clapboard doors 
of lonely farmhouses. He never talked about the public good. He 
merely told people that they would make big piofits on his railroad, 
he told them why he expected the profits and he gave his reasons. 
He had good reasons. Through all the generations that followed, 
Taggart Transcontinental was one ol the lew' railroads that never 
went bankrupt and the only one whose controlling stock remained 
in the hands of the founder's descendants. 

in his lifetime, the name "Nat Taggart” was not famous, hut noto- 
rious; it was repeated, not in homage, but in resentful curiosity; and 
if anyone admired him, it was as one admires unsuccessful bandit. 
Yet no penny of his wealth had been obtained by Jorcc or fraud; lie 
was guilty of nothing, except that he earned hi.^ own fortune and 
never forgot that it was his. 

Many stories were whispered about him. It was said that in the 

62 



wilderness of the Middle West, he murdered a state legislatoi who 
attempted to revoke a charter granted to him, to revoke it when his 
rail was laid halfway across the state some legislators had planned 
to make a fortune on Taggart stock — by selling it short Nat Taggart 
was indicted for the murder but the charge could never be proved 
He had no trouble with legislators trom then on 
It was said that Nat Taggart had slaked his life on his railroad 
many times, but once, he staked mote than his life Despeiate for 
funds with the construction of his line suspended he threw down 
three flights of stairs a distinguished gentleman who offered him a 
loan trom the government I hen he pledged his wile as securit) tor 
a loin from a millionaire who hated him and admired her beauty 
He repaid the lo tn on time and did not have to surrender his pledge 
The deal had been made with his wife s consent She was a great 
beauty from the noblest fannlv of a southern state and she had been 
disinherited by her family because she eloped with Nat Taggart when 
he was only a ragged young adventurei 
Dagny rcgietted at times that Nat T aggait was her aneestoi What 
she kit tor him did not belong in the category ot unchosen tamity 
affections She did not want her feeling to be the thing one was 
supposed to owe an uncle or a grandfather She was incapable of 
love foi any object not of her own choice and she resented anyone’s 
Jutland for it Hut had it been possible to vhoosc an ancestor she 
would have chosen Nit Taggart in voluntary horn ige and with all 
ot her giatuudc 

Nat Ta«gart s ctuuc was copied fiom an artist \ sketch o( him, the 
only recoid mr made of his appearance He had lived far into old 
age but one could ncvei think of him except as ht was on that 
sktkh -as a younp man In her childhood his statue had been Dag 
ny s first r once pi ot the exalted When she w is sent to church or to 
school and he aid people using that word, she thought that she knew 
what they infant she thought of the statue 

Ihe statue was of x voung man with a tall gaunt body and an 
angular face He held his ht ad as if he faced a challenge and found 
jo\ in his capautv to meet it All that Dagnv wanted of life was 
eontamed in the desne to hold her head as he did 

tonight she looked at the* statue when she walked across the 
eoncouise It was a moment s rest it was as it a buiden she could 
not name were lightened and as il a faint ament of air were touching 
her forehead 

In a corner of the concourse by the mam enhance there was a 
small newsstand lhe ownu a ejuicl, courteous old man with an air 
of breeding had stood behind his counter for twenty years He had 
owned a cigarette factory once but it had gone bankrupt and he 
had resigned himself to the lonely obscurity of his little stand in the 
midst of an eternal whirlpool of strangers He had no tamily or 
friends left alive He had a hobby which was his only pleasure, he 
gathered ugurettes from all over the world tor his private collection, 
he knew every brand made or that had ever been made 
Dagny hked to slop at his newsstand on her way out He seemed 
to lx* part of the Taggart Terminal, like an old watchdog too feeble 

6 ^ 



to protect It, but reassuring by the loyalty of his presence He liked 
to see her commg, because it amused him to think that be alone 
knew the importance ol the young woman in a sports coat and a 
slanting hat who came hurrying anonymously through the crowd 
She stopped tonight as usual, to buv a package ot cigarettes 
“How is the collection ' she asked him “Any new specimens'” 

He smiled sadl\ shaking his head “No, Miss Taggart 1 heie aren t 
anv new brands made anvwheie in the uorld Even the old ones are 
going one attcr another I here’s only tive or six kinds left selling 
now Iheie used to be dozens People aren t making anything new 
an\ more ’ 

‘They will That’s only tempoiary ’ 

He glanced at her and did not answer Then he sauk I like ciga- 
rettes, Miss Taggart I like to think of hre held in a man’s hand 
Fire, a dangerous torce tamed at his fingertips l often wonder about 
the hours when a man sits alone, watching the smoke of a cigaiette 
thinking I wonder what great things bavt come from such hours 
When a man thinks, there is a spot of tire alive in his mind -and it 
is proper that he should have the burning point of a ugaiette as his 
one expression ’ 

“Do they ever think' she asked involuntarily and stopped the 
question was her one personal torture and she did not want to dts 
cuss it 

The old man looked as if he had noticed the sudden stop and 
understood it but he did not start discussing it, he said instead, l 
don’t like the thing that s happening to people Miss 1 aggart * 

1 What'’ 

“l don’t know But I ve watched them here tor twenty years and 
1 \e seen the change The\ used to rush through here, and it was 
wondeiful to watch it was the hurry ot men who knew where they 
were going and were eager to gel there Now they’re huirying be- 
cause they arc afiaid It’s not a purpose that dmes them, it’s fear 
They’re not going anywhere, thcyTe escaping And 1 don’t think 
they know what it is that they want to escape They don t look at 
one another ITicy jerk when brushed against they smile too much 
but it’s an ugly kind of smiling it’s not joy it s pleading 1 don’t 
know what it is that s happening to the world ’ He shrugged “Oh. 
well who is John Galt 7 ’ 

“He’s just a meaningless phrase 1 ’ 

She was startled b\ the sharpness of her own voice, and she added 
in apology i don’t like that empty piece of slang What does U 
mean 9 Where did it come from 9 ” 

“Nobody knows,” he answered slowly 

“Why do people keep saying it ' Nobody scents able to explain just 
what it stands for, yet they all use it as it they?knew the meaning ’ 
“Why does it disturb you 7 ” he asked 
“l don’t like what they seem to mean when &hcy say it ” 

“1 don’t, either. Miss Taggart ” 

* * 

Eddie Wtllers ate his dinners in the employees’ cafeteria ol the 
Taggart Terminal There was a restaurant »n the building, patronized 

64 



by Taggart executives, but he did not Hite it. The cafeteria seemed 
part of the railroad, and he felt more at home. 

The cafeteria lay underground. It was a large room with walls of 
white tile that glittered in the reflections of electric lights and looked 
like silver brocade. It had a high ceiling, sparkling counters of glass 
and chromium, a sense of space and light. 

There was a railroad worker whom Eddie Willers met at times in 
the cafeteria. Eddie liked his face. They had been drawn into a 
chance conversation once, and then it became their habit to dine 
together whenever they happened to meet. 

Eddie had forgotten whether he had ever asked the worker’s name 
oi the nature of his job; he supposed that the job wasn’t much, 
because the man’s clothes were rough and grease-stained. Ilte man 
was not a person to him, but only a silent presence with an enormous 
intensity of interest in the one thing which was the meaning of his 
own life: in Taggart Transcontinental. 

Tonight, coming down late, Eddie saw the worker at a table in a 
corner of the half-deserted room. Eddie smiled happily, waving to 
him, and carried his tray of food to the worker’s table. 

In the privacy of their comer. Eddie felt at ease, relaxing after 
the long strain of the day He could talk as he did not talk anywhere 
else, admitting things he would not confess to anyone, thinking 
aloud, looking into the attentive eyes ot the worker across the tabic, 

“The Rio Norte Line is our last hope,” said Eddie Willers. “But 
it will save us Well have at least one branch in good condition, 
wheie it’s needed most, and that will help to save the rest. , . . It’s 
tunny—isn’t it? -to speak about a last hope for Taggart Transconti- 
nental. Do you take it seriously if somebody tells you that a meteor 
is going to destroy the earth? . . J don’t, either. . . ‘From Ocean 
to Ocean, forever’ — that’s what we heard all through our childhood, 
she and 1. No. they didn’t say ‘forever,’ hut that’s what it meant. . . , 
You know. I'm not any kind of a great man. I couldn’t have built 
that railroad. If it goes, 1 won’t be able to bring it back Til have to 
go with it. . . . Don’t pay any attention to me I don’t know why I 
should want to say things like that Guess I’m just a little tired 
tonight. . . Yes, I worked late. She didn’t ask me to stay, but there 
was a light under her door, long after all the others had gone . . .Yes, 
she’s gone home now. . . . Trouble? Oh, there’s always trouble in 
the office. But she’s not worried. She knows she can pull us 
through. . . . OI course, it’s bad. We re having many more accidents 
than you hear about. We lost two Diesels again, last week. One — 
just from old age, the other —in a head-on collision. . . . Yes, we 
have Diesels on order, at the United Locomotive Works, but we’ve 
waited tor them for two years. I don’t know whether we’U ever get 
them or not. . . . God, do we need them! Motive power — you can’t 
imagine how important that is. That’s the heart of everything. . . . 
What are you smiling at? . . . Well, as I was saying, it’s bad. But at 
least the Rio Norte Line is set. The first shipment of rail will get to 
the site in a few weeks. In a year, well run the first train on the 
new track. Nothing’s going to stop us, this time. . . . Sure, I know 
who’s going to lay the rail. McNamara, of Cleveland. He’s the con- 

65 



tractor who finished the San Sebastian Line for us There, at least, 
is one man who knows his job So we’re safe We tan count oil him 
There aren't many good contractors left We’re rushed as hell, 
but I like it I've been coming to the office an hour earlier than 
usual, but she beats me to if She s always there first What > 

1 don't know what she does at night Nothing much 1 guess 
No, she never goes out with anyone She sits at home, mostly, and 
listens to music She plays recoids What do >ou care, which 
lecords* Richard Halley She loves the music of Richard Halley 
Outside the railroad that’s the only thing she loves ” 


Chapter IV THE IMMOVABLE MOVERS 

Motive power — thought Dagnv, looking up at the laggart Building 
in the twilight - was its first need motive powti, to keep that build- 
ing standing, movement to keep it immovable It did not rest on 
piles driven into granite, it rested on the engines that lolled across 
a continent 

She telt a dim touch of anxiety She was back from a trip to the 
plant of the United Locomotive Works in New Jersey where she 
had gone to see the president of the company m person She had 
learned nothing neither the reason for the delays nor any indication 
of the date when the Diesel engines would be produced The presi 
dent of the company had talked to her for two hours But none of 
his answers had connected to any of her questions His manner had 
conveyed a peculiar note of condescending reproach whenever she 
attempted to make the conversation specific, as if she were giving 
proof of ill breeding by breaking some unwritten code known to 
everyone else 

On her way through the plant, she had seen an enormous piece 
of machinery left abandoned in a corner of the vard It had been a 
precision machine tool once, long ago of a kind that could not be 
bought anywhere now It had not been worn out it had been rotted 
by neglect, eaten by rust and the black dnppings of a dirty oil She 
had turned her face away from it A sight of that nature always 
blinded her for an instant by the burst of too violent an anger She 
did not know why, she could not define her own feeling she knew 
only that there was, in her leeling, a scream of protest against injus 
tice, and that it was a response to something much beyond an old 
piece of machinery 

The rest of her staff had gone when she entered the anteroom of 
her office, but Fddie Willers was still there, waiting lor her She 
knew at once that something had happened, by the way he looked 
and the way he followed her silently into her jnfhce 
‘ What’s the matter, Eddie 7 ’ 

“McNamara quit ” 

She looked at him blankly “What do you ijtean, quit 7 ” 

“Left Retired Went out of business ’’ 

“McNamara, our contractor 7 ’’ 

“Yes ” 


66 



“But that’s impossible!” 

“I know it.” 

“What happened? Why?” 

“Nobody knows.” 

Taking her time deliberately, she unbuttoned her coat, sat down 
at her desk, started to pull off her gloves. Then she said, “Begin at 
the beginning, Lddie. Sit down.” 

lie spoke quietly, but he remained standing. “I talked to his chief 
engineer, long distance. The chiel engineer called from Cleveland, 
to tell us. That’s all he said. He knew nothing else.” 

“What did he say?” 

“That McNamara has closed his business and gone.” 

“Where?” 

“He doesn’t know. Nobody knows.” 

She noticed that she was holding with one hand iwo empty lingers 
of the glove ot the other, the glove half-removed and forgotten She 
pulled it off and dropped it on the desk. 

Kddie said, “He’s walked out on a pile of contracts that are worth 
a fortune. He had a waiting list ol clients for the next three 
years. ...” She said nothing. He added, his voice low. “I wouldn’t 
be frightened if 1 could understand u. . . . But a thing that can't 
have any possible reason . . She icmained silent “He was the 
best contractor in the country ” 

They looked at each other. What she wanted to say was, “Oh 
God, Kddie!” Instead, her voice even, she said. “Don't worry. We’ll 
find another contractoi for the Rio Norte Line ” 

It was late when she let! her office. Outside, on the sidewalk at 
the door of the building, she paused, looking at the streets, She felt 
suddenly empty of energy, of purpose, of desire, as if a motor had 
crackled and stopped. 

A faint glow streamed from behind the buildings into the sky. the 
i ejection of thousands of unknown lights, the electric breath of the 
city. She wanted to rest. To rest, she thought, and to find enjoy- 
ment somewhere 

Her work was all she had or wanted. But there were times, like 
tonight, when she felt that sudden, peculiar emptiness, which was 
not emptiness, but silence, not despair, but immobility, as if nothing 
within her were destroyed, but everything stood still. Then she felt 
the wish to find a moment's joy outside, the wish to be held as a 
passive spectator by some work or sight of greatness. Not to make 
it, she thought, but to accept: not to begin, but to respond; not to 
create, but to admire. 1 need it to let me go on, she thought, because 
joy is one’s fuel. 

She had always been — she closed bci eyes with a faint smile of 
amusement and pain— the motive power of her own happiness. For 
once, she wanted to feel herself carried by the power of someone 
else’s achievement. As men on a dark prairie liked to see the lighted 
windows of a train going past, her achievement, the sight of power 
and purpose that gave them reassurance in the midst of empty miles 
and night— so she wanted to feel it for a moment, a brief greeting, 

67 



a single glimpse, just to wave her arm and say Someone is gomg 
somewhere 

She starttd w diking slowly her hands in the pockets of hei coat 
the shadow of her slanting hat brim across her face The buildings 
mound her rose to such heights that her glance could not hnd the 
sky She thought It has taken so much to build this city it should 
have so much to offer 

Above the door of a shop the black hole ol a radio loudspeaker 
was hurling sounds at the streets They were the sounds of a sym 
phonv concert being given somewhere in the city They were a long 
screech without shape as ol cloth and flesh bung tom at landom 
They scattered with no melody no haimony no rhythm to hold 
them It music was emotion and emotion came from thought then 
this was the scream of chaos ol the irrational of the helpless of 
man s self abdication 

She walked on She slopped at the window ol a bookstore The 
window displayed a pyramid ot slabs m brownish purple jackets in 
scribed Hie Vulture Is Molting The novel of our century said a 
placard * The penetrating study ol a businessman s greed A feailess 
revelation of man s depravity 

She walked past a movie theater Its lights wiped out half a block 
leaving only a huge photograph and some letters suspended in bid/ 
mg mid air ITie photograph was of a smiling \oung woman looking 
at her faee one felt the weariness of having seen it for years even 
while seeing it for the first lime I he letters said in a inomtn 
tous drama giving the answer to the great problem Should a 
woman tejl 7 

She walked past the door of a night club A couple came stag 
gering out to a taxicab The girl had blurred eves a perspiring face 
an ermine eape and a beautiful evening gown that had slipped oft 
one shoulder like a slovenly housewife s bathrobe revealing too 
much of her bteast not tn a manner of daring but in the manner 
of a drudge’s indifference Her escort steered her gripping her naked 
arm, his face did not have the expression of a man anticipating a 
romantic adventure but the sly look of a boy out to write obscenities 
on fences 

What had she hoped to find'— she thought walking on These 
were the things men lived by the forms of their spirit, of their cul 
ture, of their enjoyment She had seen nothing else anywhere not 
for many years 

At the corner of the street where she lived she bought a newspa- 
per and went home 

Her apartment was two rooms on the top floor of a skyscraper 
The sheets of glass in the corner window of her living room made 
it look like the prow of a ship in motion and the Ugjpts of the city 
were like phosphorescent sparks on the black wavef of steel and 
stone When she turned on a lamp, long triangles of shadow cut the 
bare walls, m a geometrical pattern of light rays broken by a few 
angular pieces of furniture ? 

She stood m the middle of the room, alone between sky and city 
There was only one thing that could give her the feeling she wanted 

68 



to experience tonight; it was the only form of enjoyment she had 
found. She turned to a phonograph and put on a record of the music 
of Richard Halley. 

It was his Fourth Concerto, the last work he had written. Hie 
crash of its opening chords swept the sights of the streets away from 
her mind. Hie Concerto was a great cry of rebellion. It was a “No” 
flung at some vast process of torture, a denial of suffering, a denial 
that held the agony of the struggle to break free. The sounds weic like 
a voice saying: There is no necessity for pain — why, then, is the worst 
pain reserved for those who will not accept its necessity? — we who 
hold the love and the secret of joy, to what punishment have we 
been sentenced for it, and by whom? . , . The sounds of torture 
became defiance, the statement ol agony became a hymn to a distant 
vision for whose sake anything was worth enduring, even this. It was 
the song of rebellion— and of a desperate quest. 

She sat still, her eyes closed, listening 

No one knew what had happened to Richard Halley, or why. The 
story of his life had been like a summary written to damn greatness 
by showing the price one pays for it. It had been a procession of 
years spent in garrets and basements, years that had taken the gray 
tinge of the walls imprisoning a man whose music overflowed with 
violent color. It had been the gray ol a struggle against long flights 
of unlighled tenement stairs, against frozen plumbing, against the 
price of a sandwich in an ill-smelling delicatessen store, against the 
faces of men who listened to music, their eyes empty. It had been a 
struggle without the relief of violence, without the recognition of 
finding a conscious enemy, with only a deal wall to batter, a wall of 
the most effective soundproofing, indifference, that swallowed blows, 
chords and screams— a battle of silence, for a man who could give 
to sounds a greater eloquence than they had ever carried — the si- 
lence of obscurity, of loneliness, of the nights when some rare orches- 
tra played one ot his works and he looked at the darkness, knowing 
that his soul went in trembling, widening circles from a radio tower 
through the air of the city, but there were no receivers tuned to 
hear it. 

“The music of Richard Halley has a quality of the heroic. Our age 
has outgrown that stuff,” said one critic. “The music of Richard 
Halley is out of key with our times It has a tone of ecstasy. Who 
cares for ecstasy nowadays?” said another. 

His life had been a summary of the lives of all the men whose 
reward is a monument in a public park a hundred years after the 
time when a reward can matter — except that Richard Halley did not 
die soon enough. He lived to see the night which, by the accepted 
laws of historv, he was not supposed to see. He was forty-three years 
old and it was the opening night of Phaethon, an opera he had 
written at the age of twenty-four. He had changed the ancient Greek 
myth to his own purpose and meaning: Phaethon, the young son of 
Helios, who stole his father s chariot and, in ambitious audacity, 
attempted to drive the sun across the sky, did not perish, as he 
perished in the myth; in Halley's opera, PhaCthon succeeded. The 
opera had been performed then, nineteen years ago, and had closed 

69 



after one performance, to the sound of booing and catcalls. That 
night, Richard Halley had walked the streets of the city till dawn, 
trying to find an answer to a question, which he did not find* 

On the night when the opera was presented again, nineteen years 
later, the last sounds of the music crashed into the sounds of the 
greatest ovation the opera house had ever heard. The ancient walls 
could not contain it, the sounds of cheering burst through to the 
lobbies, to the stairs, to the streets, to the boy who had walked those 
streets nineteen years ago. 

Dagny was in the audience on the night of the ovation. She was 
one of the few who had known the music of Richard Halley much 
earlier, but she had never seen him. She saw him being pushed out 
on the stage, saw him facing the enormous spread of waving arms 
and cheering heads. He stood without moving, a tall, emaciated man 
with graying hair. He did not bow, did not smile; he just stood there, 
looking at the crowd. His face had the quiet, earnest look of a man 
staring at a question. 

‘The music ot Richard Halley,” wrote a critic next morning, 'be- 
longs to mankind. It is the product and the expression of the great- 
ness of the people.” “There is an inspiring lesson,” said a minister, 
“in the life of Richard Halley. He has had a terrible struggle, but 
what docs that matter? It is proper, it is noble that he should have 
endured suffering, injustice, abuse at the hands of his brothers - in 
order to enrich their lives and teach them to appreciate the beauty 
of great music.” 

On the day after the opening, Richard Halley retired. 

He gave no explanation. He merely told his publisher that his 
career was over. He sold them the rights to his works for a modest 
sum, even though he knew that his royalties would now bring him 
a fortune. *He went away, leaving no address. It was eight years ago: 
no one had seen him since. 

Dagny listened to the Fourth Concerto, her head thrown back, her 
eyes closed. She lay hall-stretched across the corner ol a couch, her 
body relaxed and still; but tension stressed the shape of her mouth 
on her motionless face, a sensual shape drawn in lines of longing. 

Aftei a while, she opened her eyes. She noticed the newspaper 
she had thrown down on the couch. She reached for it absently, to 
turn the vapid headlines out of sight. The paper fell open. She saw 
the photograph of a face she knew, and the heading of a story. She 
slammed the pages shut and flung them aside. 

It was the face of Francisco d’Anconia. The heading said that he 
had arrived in New York. What of it? —she thought. She would not 
have to see him. She had not seen him for years. 

She sat looking at the newspaper on the floor. Don’t read it. she 
thought; don't look at it. But the face, she thought, had not changed. 
How could a face remain the same when everything else was gone? 
She wished they had not caught a picture of him whpn he smiled. 
That kind of smile did not belong in the pages of a newspaper. It 
was the smile of a man who is able to see, to know |md to create 
the glory of existence. It was the mocking, challenging smile of a 

70 



brilliant intelligence- Don’t read it, she thought; not now— not to 
that music — oh, not to that music! 

She reached for the papci and opened it. 

The story said that Softer Francisco d’Anconia had granted an 
interview to the press in his suite at the Wayne-Falkland Hotel. He 
said that he had come to New York for two important reasons: a 
hatchcck girl at the Cub Club, and the liverwurst at Moe’s Delicates- 
sen on Third Avenue, He had nothing to say about the coming di- 
vorce tiial of Mr and Mrs. Gilbert Vail. Mrs. Vail, a lady of noble 
breeding and unusual loveliness, had taken a shot at her distin- 
guished young husband, some monlhs ago, publicly declaring that 
she wished to get rid of him for the sake of her lover, Francisco 
d’Anconia. She had given to the press a detailed account of her 
secret romance, including a description of the night of last New 
Year’s Eve which she had spent at d’Anconia’s villa in the Andes. 
Her husband had survived the shot and had sued for divorce. She 
had countered with a suit for half of her husband’s millions, and 
with a recital of his private life which, she said, made hers look 
innocent. All of that had been splashed over the newspapers for 
weeks. But Senor d’Anconia had nothing to say about it, when the 
reporters questioned him. Would he deny Mrs. Vail’s story, they 
asked. “I never deny anything,” he answered. The reporters had 
been astonished by his sudden arrival in town; they had thought that 
he would not wish to be there just when the worst of the scandal 
was about to explode on the front pages. But they had been wrong. 
Francisco d’Anconia added one more comment to the reasons for 
his ai rival ”1 wanted to witness the farce,” he said. 

Dagny let the paper slip to the floor. She sat, bent over, her head 
on her arms. She did not move, but the strands of hair, hanging 
down to hei knees, trembled in sudden jolts once in a while. 

The great chords oi Halley’s music went on. filling the room, pierc- 
ing the glass of the windows, streaming out over the city. She was 
hearing the music. It was her quest, her cry, 

* * 

James Taggart glanced about the living room of his apartment, 
wondering what time it was; he did not feel like moving to find his 
watch. He sat in an armchair, dressed in wnnkled pajamas, bare- 
tooled: it was too much trouble to look for his slippers. The light of 
the gray sky in the windows hurt his eyes, still sticky with sleep. He 
felt, inside his skull, the nasty heaviness which is about to become 
a headache. He wondered angrily why he had stumbled out into the 
living room. Oh yes, he remembered, to look for the time. 

He slumped sidewise over the arm of the chair and caught sight 
of a clock on a distant building: it was twenty minutes past noon. 

Through the open door of the bedroom, he heard Betty Pope 
washing her teeth in the bathroom beyond. Her girdle lay on the 
floor, by the side of a chair with the rest of her clothes: the girdle 
was a laded pink, with broken strands of rubber. 

“Hurry up, will you?” he called irritably. k Tve got to dress.” 

She did not answer. She had left the door of the bathroom open; 
he could hear the sound of gargling. 

71 



Why do 1 do those things 9 he thought, remembering last night 
But it was too much trouble to look for an anvwer 
Betty Pope came into the living room, dragging the tolds of a satin 
harlequin negligee — checkered in orange and purple She looked 
awful in a negligee, thought Taggart, she was ever so much better 
m a nding habit, in the photographs on the society pages of the 
newspapers She was a lanky girl, all bones and loose joints that did 
not move smoothly She had a homely face, a bad complexion and 
a look ot impertinent condescension derived tTom the fact that she 
belonged to one of the very best families 

“Aw hell r she said at nothing m particular, stretching heiself 
to limber up 'Jim, where arc your nail clippers 7 ! ve got to trim 
my toenails 

“I don t know I have a headache Do it at home 
“\ou look unappeti/ing in the morning she said indifferently 
“You look like a snail ' 

“Why don't you shut up ? 

She wandered aimlessly about the room “I don t want to go 
home,” she said with no particular feeling “I hate morning Here’s 
another day and nothing to do 1 ve got a tea session on for this 
afternoon, at L»/ Blanc’s Oh well, it might be tun, because 1 1 / is a 
bitch She picked up a glass and swallowed the stale remnant of a 
drink ‘Why don t you have them icpair your an conditioner 7 this 
place smells 

* Are >ou through in the bathroom 7 he asked 1 have to dress 
I have an important engagement today ’ 

‘ Go right in 1 don’t mind I 11 share the bathroom with you l 
hate to be rushed ’ 

While he shaved, he saw her dressing in front of the open bnth 
room door She took a long time twisting herself into her girdle 
hooking garteis to her stockings, pulling on an ungainly expensive 
tweed suit The harlequin negligee, picked from an advertisement in 
the smartest fashion magazine was like a uniform which she knew 
to be expected on certain occasions which she had woin dutifully 
for a specified purpose and then discarded 
The nature of then relationship had the same quality Ihere was 
no passion m it, no desire, no actual pleasure not even a sense of 
shame To them the act of sex was neither joy noi sin It meant 
nothing They had heard that men and women were supposed to 
sleep together, so they did 

“Jim, why don’t you take me to the Armenian restaurant tonight* 7 ’ 
she asked “I love shish-kebab ” 

“1 can’t,” he answered angrily through the soap lather on his face 
“I’ve got a busy day ahead ” 

“Why don’t you cancel it* 7 ” 

“What 9 ’ 

“Whatever it is ” 

**Il is very important, my dear It is a meeting our Board of 
Directors ” 

’*Oh, don’t be stuffy about youT damn railroad It’$ boring I hate 
businessmen They’re dull ” 


72 



He did not answer 

She glanced at him slyly, and hoi voice acquired a livelier note 
when she dtawled “Jock Benson said that you have a soft snap on 
that railroad anyway because it s your sistei who runs the whole 
works ” 

‘Oh, he did, did he } ’ 

“I think that your sister is awful I think it’s disguslmg—a woman 
aumg like a grease -monkey and posing aiound like a big executive 
It’s so unfeimmne Who does she think she is anvway'’ 

laggart stepped out to the threshold He leaned against the door- 
jamb studying Betty Pope 1 here was a taint smile on his face sarcastic 
and confident They had he thought, a bond in common 

4 It might interest you to know my dear 1 he said, ‘ that 1 m putting 
the skids under my sister this afternoon 
No’ ’ she said interested ‘ Really ; 

And that is why this Board meeting is so important ’ 

‘Arc you really going to kick her out r 

4 No That’s nut necessary or advisable l shall merely put her m 
her place It’s the chance I \e been waiting for ’ 

You got something on her 9 Some scandal 9 
‘No no You wouldn t understand It’s merely that she $ gone too 
far for once and shi s going to get slapped down She s pulled an 
inexcusable soit of stunt without consulting anybody It s a venous 
offense against our Mexican neighbors When the Board hears about 
it, they I] pass a couple of new rulings on the* Operating Department, 
which will make my sister a little easier to manage ’ 

‘You’re smart, Jim she said 

“1 d better get dressed He sounded pleised He turned back to 
the washbowl adding checrtully Maybe I will take you out tonight 
and buy you some shish kebab ’ 

I he telephone rang 

He lilted the recover 1 he operatoi announced a longdistance 
call from Mexico ( lty 

the hysteiical voice that came on the wire was that ot his political 
man in Mexico 

l eouldn t help it lim’ it gulped l couldn t help it’ We 
had no warning, 1 swear to Ciod, nobody suspected, nobody saw it 
coming, I’ve done my best you can t blame me, Jim, it was a bolt 
out ot the blue’ The decree came out this morning, just five minutes 
ago they sprang it on us like that without any notice’ I he govern- 
ment ot the People’s State ot Mexico has nationalized the San Sebas- 
tian Mines and the San Sebastian Railroad ” 

+ * 

and, therefore', f can assure the gentlemen of the Board that 
there is no occasion tor panic The event of this morning is a regrettable 
development, but J have full confidence — based on my knowledge of 
the inner processes shaping our foreign policy in Washington-— that 
our government will negotiate an equitable settlement with the gov- 
ernment of the People’s State ot Mexico, and that we will receive 
lull and just compensation for our property " 

73 



James Taggart stood at the long table, addressing the Board of 
Directors His voice was precise and monotonous; it connoted safety * 
‘Tm giad to report, however, that I foresaw the possibility of such 
a turn of events and look ever> precaution to protect the interests 
ol Taggart Transcontinental Some months ago I instructed oui Op- 
erating Department to cut the schedule on the San Sebastian Lint 
down to a single train a day, and to remove from it oui best motive 
power and rolling stock, as well as ever) piece of equipment that 
could be moved The Mexican government was able to sei/e nothing 
but a few wooden cars and one superannuated locomotive M> deu 
sion has saved the company many millions of dollars —I shall have 
the exact figures computed and submit them to you I do feel, how- 
ever, that our stockholders will be justified in expecting that those 
who bore the major responsibility for this venture should now bear 
the consequences of their negligence 1 would suggest, therefore, that 
we request the resignation of Mr Clarence Eddington, our economic 
consultant, who recommended the construction of the San Sebastian 
Line, and ol Mr Jules Mott, our icpresentative in Mexico City ” 
The men sal around the long table, listening I hey did not think 
of what (hey would have to do, but of what they would have to 
say to the men they represented Taggart’s speech gave them what 
they needed 

+ * 

Orren Boyle was waiting tor him, when Taggart returned to his 
office Once they were alone Taggart s manner changed He leaned 
against the desk, sagging his face loose, and white 
" • Well 0 ” he asked 

Boyle spiead his hinds out helplessly 1 l vc checked Jim,” he 
said “ft’s straight all right d'Anconias lost fifteen million dollars of 
his own money in those mines No, there wasn’t anything phony 
about that he didn’t pull any sort of trick, he put up his own cash 
and now he’s lost it ’ 

“WeH, what's he going to do about U 9 ’ 

“That — T don’t know Nobody docs ” 

‘He’s not going to let himself be robbed is he 7 He’s too smart 
for that He must have something up his sleeve ” 

“T sure hope so ” 

“He’s outwitted some of the slickest combinations of money- 
grubbers on earth Is he going to be taken by a bunch of Greaser- 
politicians with a decree 9 He must have something on them, and 
he’ll get the last word and we must be sure to be m on it, too 1 ” 
“That’s up to you, Jim You’re his friend ” 

“Friend be damned* I hate his guts ” 

He pressed a button for his secretary l he seci clary entered uncer 
tainiy, looking unhappy, he was a young man, no loiter loo young, 
with a bloodless face and the well-bred mannci of genteel poverty 
“Did you get me an appointment with Franuscb d’Ancoma 7 ” 
snapped Taggart 
“No, sir ” 

“But, God damn it, I told you to call the--” 

“I wasn’t able to, sir l have tried ” 

74 



“Well, try again.” 

“I mean I wasn’t able to obtain the appointment, Mr. Taggart,” 
“Why not?” 

“He declined it.” 

“You mean he refused to see me?” 

“Yes, sir, that is what I mean.” 

“He wouldn't see me?” 

“No, sir, he wouldn't.” 

“Did you speak to him in person?” 

“No, sir, I spoke to his secietary.” 

“What did he tell you? Just what did he say?” The young man 
hesitated and looked more unhappy. “What did he say?” 

“He said that Senor d'Anconia said that you bore him, Mr. 
Taggart." 

<c * 

The proposal which they passed was known as the “Anti-dog-eat- 
dog Rule.” When they voted tor it, the members of the National 
Alliance of Railroads sat in a large hall m the deepening twilight of 
a late autumn evening and did not look at one another. 

I he National Alliance ol Raiiioads was an organization termed, 
it was claimed, to protect the welfare ol the railroad industry. This 
was to be achieved by developing methods of co-operation for a 
common purpose: this was to be achieved by the pledge ol every 
member to subordinate his own interests to those of the industry as a 
whole, the interests of the industry as a whole were to be determined 
by a majority vote, and every member was committed to abide by any 
decision the major ity chose to make. 

“Members ol the same protession or of the same industry should 
stick together,” the organizers ot the Alliance had said. “We all have 
the same problems, the same interests, the same enemies. We waste 
our energy fighting one another, instead of presenting a common 
front to the world. We can all glow and prosper together, it we pool 
our efforts." “Against whom is this Alliance being organized?” a 
skeptic had asked. The answet had been: “Why, its not ‘against' 
anybody. But it you want to put it that way, why, it’s against shippers 
or supply manufacturers or anyone who might try to take advantage 
of us. Against whom is any union organized?" “That's what 1 wonder 
about,” the skeptic had said. 

When the Anti-dog-eal-dog Rule was offered to the vote of the 
full membership of the National Alliance of Railroads at its annual 
meeting, it was the lirsl mention of this Rule in public. But all the 
members had heard of it; it had been discussed privately for a long 
time, and more insistently in the fast few months. The men who sat 
in the large hall of the meeting were the presidents of the railroads. 
They did not like the Anti-dog-cat-dog Rule; they had hoped it 
would never be brought up. But when it was brought up, they voted 
for it. 

No railroad was mentioned by name in the speeches that preceded 
the voting. The speeches dealt only with the public welfare. It was 
said that while the public welfare was threatened by shortages of 
transportation, railroads were destroying one another through vicious 

75 



competition, on “the brutal policy ot dog-eat-dog ” While there ex 
isted blighted aieas where rail service had been discontinued, there 
existed at the same time large regions wheie two or more railroads 
were competing for a traffic barely sufficient for one It was said that 
there were great opportunities for younger railroads in the blighted 
areas While it was true that such areas offered little economic mcen 
tive at present, a public spirited railroad, it was said would under 
take to provide transportation for the struggling inhabitants since 
the prime purpose of a raihoad was public service not prolit 

TTien it was said that large established railroad systems were es 
sential to the public welfare and that the collapse ot one of them 
would be a national catastrophe and that if ont such system had 
happened to sustain a ciushing loss in a public spirited attempt to 
contribute to international good will it was entitle d to public support 
to help it survive the blow 

No railroad was mentioned by name But when thi chairman ot 
the meeting raised his hand as a solemn signal that they were about 
to vole everybody looked at Dan Conway president of the Phoenix 
Durango 

I here were only five, dissenters who voted agunst it \ct when 
the chairman annoum^d that the measure had pissed theie was no 
cheering no sounds of approval no movement nothing but \ heav\ 
silence To the last minute tvuy one of ihtm had hoped that some 
one would save ttKm trom it 

Ihe Anti dog eat ciog Rule w is dt scribed as a measure ol \olun 
tarv self regulation intend* d the better to enforce the laws long 
since passed bv the country s I egislatuie Ihe Rule provided that 
the members ot the National Alhtnee of Railroads wire tot bidden 
to engage in practices delmed is ‘destructive competition that m 
regions declared to be icstnUed no more than one tailroad would 
be permitted to operate that in such regions seniority belonged to 
the oldest railroad now operating then and that the newcomers 
who had encroached unfauly upon its terrttoiy would suspend oper 
dlions within nine months after being so ordered that the £ xecutive 
Board of the National Alliance of Railroads was empowered to de 
cide at its sole discretion which regions were to be restricted 

When the meeting adjourned the men hastened to leave Hierc 
were no private discussions, no lnendlv loitering The gicat hall be 
came deserted m an unusually short time Nobody spoke to or 
looked at Dan Conway 

In the lobby of the building James Taggart met Orrcn Boyle 
They had made no appointment to meet but laggart saw a bulky 
figure outlined against a marble wall and knew who it was before 
he saw the face I hey approached cMch other, and Boyle said his 
smile less soothing than usual I vt dtliveied Vour twin now 
Jimmy * ‘You didn t have to come here Why did you ; said lag 
gart sullenly * Oh, just (or the fun of it said Boyfe 

Dan Conway sat alone among rows of t mpty sdats He was still 
there when the charwoman came to clean the hall When she hailed 
him, he rose obediently and shuffled to the door Passing her in the 
aisle, he fumbled in his pocket ano handed her 4 live dollar bill 

76 



silently meekly, not looking at her face He did not seem to know 
what he was doing he acted as if he thought that he was m some 
place where generosity demanded that he give a tip before leaving 
Dagny was still at her desk when the door of her office flew open 
and James Taggart rushed in It was the first time he had ever en- 
tued in such manner His face looked feverish 
She had not seen him since the nationalization of the San Sebas- 
tian 1 ine He had not sought to discuss it with her, and she had said 
nothing about it She had been proved right so eloquently, she had 
thought, that comments were unnecessary A feeling which was part 
courtesy part men y had stopped h< r from stating to him the eonclu 
sion to be drawn from the events In all reason and justice there 
was but one conclusion he could draw She had heard about his 
spetch to the Board ot Directors She had shrugged, contemptuously 
amused if it served his puiposc whatever that was, to appropriate 
hei achievements then lor his own advantage if for no other reason 
he would leave her tree to achieve from now on 

So vou think you’re the only one who s doing anything tor this 
railroad * 

She looked at him bewildered His voice was shrill he stood in 
front ot her desk tense with excitement 

So you think that I ve ruined the company don't you*’ he 
yelled And now you’re the only one who can save us* Think l 
have no way to make up foi the Mexican loss* 

She asked slowly What do vou want* 

I want to tell you some news Do you remember the Anti dog 
eat dog pioposal ot the Railroad Alii inee that 1 told you about 
months ago* You didn t like the idea You didn t like it at ail 
I remember What about it* 

It has been passed 
What has been passe d * 

Ihe Anti dog eat dog Rule Just a few minutes ago At the meet- 
ing Nine months trom now there s not going to be any Phoenix 
Durango Railroad in Coloiado’ 

A glass ashtray crashed to the floor off the desk as she leaped to 
her feet 

You rotten bastards’ 

He stood motionless He was smiling 

She knew that she was shaking open to him, without defenve and 
that this was the sight he enjoyed but it did not matter to her Then 
she saw his smile— and suddenly the blinding anger vanished She 
felt nothing She studied that smile with a cold impersonal curiosity 
They stood facing each other He l<x>ked as if, for the first time, 
he was not afraid ot her He was gloating 1 he event meant some 
thing to him much beyond the destruction of a competitor It was 
not a victory over Dan C on way, but over her She did not know 
why or m what manner but she felt certain that he knew 
For the flash ot one instant, she thought that here, before her, m 
Janies Taggart and in that which made him smile, was a secret she 
had never suspected, and it was crucially important that she learn to 
understand it But the thought flashed and vanished 

77 



She whirled to the door of a closet and seized her coat. 

“Where are you going?” Taggart’s voice* had dropped; it sounded 
disappointed and faintly warned. 

She did not answer She rushed out of the oflice. 

* * 

“Dan, you have to light them. I’ll help vou. I’ll fight for you with 
everything I’ve got/’ 

Dan Conway shook his head. 

He sat at his desk, the empty expanse of a faded blotter before 
him, one feeble lamp lighted in a corner of the room. Dagny had 
rushed straight to the city office of the Phoenix- Duvango. Conway 
was there, and he still sat as she had found him He had smiled at 
her entrance and said, “Funny, f thought you would come,” his voice 
gentle, lifeless. They did not know each other well, but they had met 
a few times m Colorado. 

“No,” he said, “it's no use ” 

“Do you mean because of that Alliance agreement that >ou 
signed? It won’t hold. This is plain expropriation No court will up- 
hold tt. And ll Jim tties to hide behind the usual looters’ slogan of 
‘public welfare.’ I'll go on the stand and swear that Taggart trans- 
continental can’t handle the whole traffic of Colorado. And if anv 
court rules against you, you can appeal and keep on appealing for 
the next ten years ” 

“Yes,” he said, “I could . . . I'm not sure I’d win, but 1 could try 
and l could hang onto the rati toad lor a lew years longer, but 
No, it\ not the legal points that I'm thinking about, one wa> or the 
other. It’s not that.” 

“What, then?” 

“I don’t want to light it, I)agn>." 

She looked at him incredulously. It was the one sentence which, 
she felt sure, he had never uttered before, a man could not reverse 
himself so late in life 

Dan Conway was approaching fifty. He had the square, stolid, 
stuhborn face of a tough freight engineer, rather than a company 
president, the face of a fighter, with a young, fanned skin and graying 
hair He had taken over a shaky little railroad m Arizona, a road 
whose net revenue was less than that of a successful gioceiy store, 
and he had built it into the best lailroad of the Southwest. He spoke 
little, seldom read books, had never gone to college. I he whole 
sphere of human endeavors, with one exception, left him blankly 
indifferent; he had no touch of that which people called culture. But 
he knew railroads. 

“Why don’t you want to fight?" 

“Because they had the right to do it.” 

“Dan ” she asked, “have you lost yout mind?” * 

“I’ve never gone back on my word in my life,” hju said tunelessly 
“1 don’t care what the courts decide. 1 promised to dbey the majority. 
I have to obey.” * 

“Did you expect the majority to do this to you?*’ 

“No.” There was a kind of faint convulsion in the stolid face. He 
spoke softly, not looking at her, the helpless astonishment still raw 

78 



withm him “No I didn’t expect it 1 heard them talking about it foT 
over a year, but l didn’t believe it Even when they were voting, i 
didn’t believe it ” 

“What did you expect 7 ” 

“1 thought They said all of us were to stand for the common 
good 1 thought what I had done down there m Colorado was good 
Good for everybody ” 

“Oh, you damn tool 1 Don’t you see that that’s what you’re being 
punished for— because it was good 7 ” 

fie shook his head “I don’t understand it,” he said “But 1 see 
no way out ’ 

‘ Did you promise them to agree to destroy yourself 7 ’ 

“There doesn’t seem to be any choice for any oi us ' 

“What do you mean' 7 ” 

*Dagn\ the whole world s in a terrible state right now I don’t 
know what’s wrong with it, but something’s very wrong Men have 
to get together and tmd a way out But who’s to decide which way 
to take unless it’s the majority? J guess that’s the only fair method 
ol deciding, 1 don’t see any other I suppose somebody’s got to be 
sacrificed If it turned out to be me I have no right to complain 
The right’s on their side Men have to get together ’ 

She made an effort to speak calmly, she was trembling with anger 
‘It that s the price of getting together then I II be damned if I want 
lo live on the same caith with anv human beings* If the rest of them 
can survive only bv destroving us, then why should we wish them to 
survive 7 Nothing can make self immolation proper Nothing can give 
them the right to turn men into sacrificial animals Nothing can make 
U moral to destroy the best One can’t be punished for being good 
One can t be penalized for ability If that is right, then we’d better 
start slaughtering cm another, because there isn’t any right at all in 
the wot Id* 

He did not answer fie looked at her helplessly 
if it s that kind oi world how tan we live in it?” she asked 
‘ I don t know * he whispered 

“Dan, do you really think it’s right 7 In all truth, deep down, do 
you think it’s right 7 ’ 

He dosed his tyes “No.” he said Then he looked at her and she 
saw a look of tortute for the first time “That’s what I’ve been silting 
here trying to understand I know that I ought to think it’s right — 
but I can’t It’s as it my tongue wouldn’t turn to say it I keep seeing 
every ue of the track down there, every signal light, every bridge, 
every night that I spent when ” His head dropped down on his 
amis “01\ God, it’s so damn unjust*” 

*Dan,” she said thiough her teelh, ‘tight it ” 

He raised his head His eyes were empty “No,” he said “U would 
be wrong I’m just selfish ” 

*Oh, damn that rotten tripe* You know better than that!” 

“I don’t know ” His voice was very tired. “I’ve been sitting 
here, trying to think about it I don’t know what is right any 
more ” He added. “1 don’t think I care ” 

She knew suddenly that all further words were useless and that 

79 



Dan Conway would never be a man of action again. She did not 
know what made her certain of it. She said, wondering, “You’ve 
never given up in the face of a battle before.” 

“No, 1 guess I haven’t. . . He spoke with a quiet, indifferent 
astonishment. T’ve fought storms and floods and rock slides and rail 
fissure. ... I knew how to do it, and I liked doing it. . , . But this 
kind of battle — it’s one I can’t fight.’’ 

“Why?” 

“I don’t know. Who knows why the world is what it is? Oh. who 
is John Galt?” 

She winced. ‘Then what are you going to do?” 

“1 don’t know . . 

“I mean — ” She stopped. 

He knew what she meant. “Oh, there’s always something to 
do. ...” He spoke without conviction. “I guess it’s only Colorado 
and New Mexico that they’re going to declare restricted. I’ll still 
have the line in Arizona to run.” He added, “As it was twenty years 
ago . . . Well, it will keep me busy. I’m getting tired. Dagny. I didn’t 
take time to notice it, but 1 guess I am ” 

She could say nothing 

“I’m not going to build a line through one of their blighted areas.” 
he said m the same indifferent voice. “1 hat’s what they tried to hand 
me for a consolation prize, but I think it’s just talk. You can't build 
a railroad where there's nothing for hundreds ot miles but a couple 
of farmers who're not growing enough to feed themselves. You can’t 
build a road and make it pay. If you don't make it pay, who’s going 
to? It doesn’t make sense to me They just didn't know what they 
were saying.” 

“Oh, to hell with their blighted areas! It’s you I’m thinking about.” 
She had to name it. “What will you do with yourself?” 

“I don’t know . . . Well, there’s a lot of things I haven’t had time 
to do. Fishing, for instance. I’ve always liked fishing. Maybe I’ll start 
reading books, always meant to Guess I'll take it easy now. Guess 
I'll go tishing. There’s some nice places down in Arizona, where it’s 
peaceful and quiet and you don’t have to see a human being for 
miles. . . He glanced up at her and added, “Forget it. Why should 
you worry about me 7 ” 

“It’s not about you, it’s . Dan,” she said suddenly, “I hope you 
know it's not for your sake that I wanted to help you fight.” 

He smiled: it was a faint, friendly smile. “1 know,” he said 

“It’s not out of pity or charity or any ugly reason like that. U>ok. 
I intended to give you the battle of your life, down there m Colorado. 
I intended to cut into your business and squeeze you to t!?e wall and 
drive you out, if necessary.” 

He chuckled faintly; it was appreciation. * You would have made 
a pretty good try at it, too,” he said. 

“Only I didn’t think it would be necessary, I thought there was 
enough room there for both of us.” 

“Yes,” he said. “There was.” 

“Still, if I found that there wasn’t, I would have fotight you, and 
if I could make my road better than yours. I’d have broken you and 

80 



not given a damn about what happened to you But this Dan, I 
don’t think 1 want to look at our Rio Norte Line now 1 Oh 
God, Dan, I don’t want to be a looter’” 

He looked at her silently for a moment It was an odd look, as it 
horn a great distance He said softly, “You should have been born 
about a hundred years earlier kid Then you would have had a 
chance ’ 

* f o hell with that 1 intend to make my own chance ” 

‘Dial’s what I intended at youi age ’ 

You succeeded ” 

Have P 

She sat still suddvnly unable to move 

He sat up stiaight and said shaiply almost as if he were issuing 
orders You'd better look at that Rio Norte Line of yours, and 
you’d better do it fast Get it ready before I move out, because if 
you don t that will be the end of hllis Wyatt and all the rest of 
them down there, and they’re the best people left in the country 
You can t let that happen It s all on your shoulders now It would 
be no use tiymg to explain to \otn brother that it’s going to be much 
tougher for you down there without me to compete with But you 
and I know it So go to it Whatever you do you won’t be a looter 
No looter could lun a railroad in that part of the country and last 
at it Whatever you make down there you will have earned it Lice 
like your brothel don t count anyway It’s up to you now ” 

She sat looking at him wondi ring what it was that had defeated 
a man of this kind she knew that it was not fames Taggart 

She saw him looking at her as il he weic struggling with a question 
mark of his own 1 hen he smiled and she saw incredulously, that 
the smile held sadness and pity 

You’d better not feel soriy lor me ” he said T think, of the two 
of us, its >ou who have the harder time ahead And I think you’re 
going to get it worse than 1 did ’ 

* * 

She had telephoned the mills and made an appointment to see 
Hank Reaiden that afternoon She had just hung up the receiver 
and was bending over the maps of the Rio Norte Line spread on 
her desk, when the door opened Dagny looked up, startled, she did 
not expect the door ol her office to open without announcement 
The man who entered was a stranger He was young, tall, and 
something about him suggested violence, though she could not say 
what it was, because the first trait one grasped about him was a 
quality of self-control that seemed almost arrogant He had dark 
eves, disheveled hair and his clothes were expensive, but worn as if 
he did not care or notice what he wore 
‘Fllis Wyatt ” he said in self-introduction 

She leaped to her feet, involuntarily She understood why nobody 
had or could have stopped him m the counter office 
“Sit down, Mr Wyatt,” she said, smiling 

“It won’t be necessary” He did not smile “i don’t hold long 
conferences ” 


81 



Slowly, taking her time by conscious intention, she sat down and 
leaned back, looking at him. 

'‘Well?'’ she asked. 

“I came to see you because 1 understand you’re the only one 
who's got any brains in this rotten outfit.” 

“What can I do for you?” 

“You can listen to an ultimatum.” He spoke distinctly, giving an 
unusual clarity to every syllable. “I expect Taggart Transcontinental, 
nine months from now. to run trains in Colorado as my business 
requires them to he run. If the snide stunt you people perpetrated 
on the Phocnix-Durango was done for the purpose of saving yourself 
from the necessity of effort, this is to give you notice that you will 
not get away with it. 1 made no demands on you when you could 
not give me the kind of service I needed. I found someone who 
could. Now you wish to force me to deal with you. You expect to 
dictate terms by leaving me no choice You expect me to hold my 
business down to the level of your incompetence. This is to tell you 
that you have miscalculated.” 

She said slowly, with effort. “Shall 1 tell you what 1 intend to do 
about our service tn C olorado?” 

“No. I have no interest in discussions and intentions. 1 expect 
transportation. What >ou do to furnish it and how you do it. is your 
problem, not mine. I am merely giving you a warning. Those who 
wish to deal with me. must do .so on my terms or not at all 1 do 
not make terms with incompetence. 11 >ou expect to earn mone> by 
carrying the oil I produce, you must be as good at your business as 
1 am at mine. 1 wish this to be understood.” 

She said quietly, “I understand.” 

“I shan’t waste lime proving to you why you'd better take my 
ultimatum seriously. If you have the intelligence to keep this corrupt 
organization functioning at all, you have the intelligence to judge 
this for yourself. We both know that if Taggart Transcontinental runs 
trains in Colorado the way it did five years ago. it will ruin me. I 
know that this is what you people intend to do You expect to feed 
oft me while you can and to find another carcass to pick dry after 
you have finished mine. That is the policy of most of mankind today. 
So here is my ultimatum: it is now in your power to destroy me; I 
may have to go; but if 1 go, I’ll make sure that I take all the rest of 
you along with me.” 

Somewhere within her, under the numbness that held her still to 
receive the lashing, she felt a small point of pain, hot like the pain 
of scalding. She wanted to tell him of the years she had spent looking 
for men such as he to work with; she wanted to teU him that his 
enemies were hers, that she was fighting the same bat$e; she wanted 
to cry to him; I'm not one of them! But she knew (hat she could 
not do it. She bore the responsibility for Taggart Transcontinental 
and for everything done in its name; she had no |ight to justify 
herself now. 

Sitting straight, her glance as steady and open as hii she answered 
evenly, “You will get the transportation you need, Mr. Wyatt,” 

She saw a faint hint of astonishment in his face; this was not the 

82 



manner or the answer he had expected; perhaps it was what she had 
not said that astonished him most: that she offered no defense, no 
excuses. He took a moment to study her silently. Then he said, his 
voice less sharp: 

“All right. Thank you. Good day/’ 

She inclined her head. He bowed and left the office. 

* * 

“That’s the story, Hank. I had worked out an almost impossible 
schedule to complete the Rio Norte Line in twelve months. Now FH 
have to do it in nine. You were to give us the rail over a period of 
one year. Can you give it to us within nine months? If there’s any 
human way to do it, do it. If not, I’ll have to find some other means 
to finish it.” 

Reardon sat behind his desk. His cold, blue eyes made two hori- 
zontal cuts across the gaunt planes of his face: they remained hori- 
zontal, impassively half-closed: he said evenly, without emphasis: 

“I'll do it.' 1 

Dagny leaned back m her chair. The short sentence was a shock. 
It was not merely relief: it was the sudden realization that nothing 
else was necessary to guarantee that it would be done; she needed 
no proofs, no questions, no explanations; a complex problem could 
rest safely on three syllables pronounced by a man who knew what 
he was saying. 

“Don’t show that you're relieved " His voice was mocking. “Not 
too obviously." His narrowed eyes were watching her with an unre- 
\ealing smile. “I might think that I hold Taggart Transcontinental in 
my power." 

“You know that, anyway " 

"1 do And 1 intend to make you pay for it." 

“I expect to. How much?" 

“Twenty dollars extra per tun on the balance ol the order deliv- 
ered alter today." 

“Pretty sleep. Hank. Is that the best price you can give me?" 

“No. But that's the one Pm going to get. I could ask twice that 
and you’d pay it." 

“Yes, l would. And you could. But you won’t." 

“Why won't l?" 

“Because you need to have the Rio Norte Line built. It's your 
first showcase fot Reardon Metal." 

He chuckled. “That's right 1 like to deal with somebody who has 
no illusions about getting favors." 

“Do you know what made me feel relieved, when you decided to 
take advantage of it?" 

“What?" 

“That 1 was dealing, for once, with somebody who doesn’t pretend 
to give favors." 

His smile had a discernible quality now: it was enjoyment. “You 
always play it open, don’t you?" he asked. 

;Tve never noticed you doing otherwise." 

“I thought 1 was the only one who could afford to." 

“I’m not broke, in that sense. Hank." 



“I think I’m going to break you some day — in that sense ” 
“Why?” 

“I’ve always wanted to ” 

“Don’t you have enough cowaids around you'” 

“That's why I'd enjo> trying it — because you’re the only exception 
So you think it’s right that 1 should squeeze every penny of profit 1 
can, out of your emergency''” 

“Certainly I’m not a fool I don't think you’re in business lor 
m> convenience ” 

“Don’t you wish I were'” 

“I'm not a moocher, Hank ' 

“Aien't you going to hnd it hard to pay'” 

“That’s my problem, not youts I want that rail ' 

'At twenty dollars extra pei ton ' 

“Okay, Hank ” 

“Fine You'll get the rail I may get my exorbitant profit - or lag- 
gart Transcontinental may crash before 1 collect” 

She said, without smiling, “If l don’t get that line built in nine 
months, iaggart Transcontinental will crash ” 

'It won t so long as you run it ’ 

When he did not smile, his face looked inanimate, only his eyes 
remained alive, active with a cold brilliant dantv ol peu option But 
what he was made to led by the things he perceived no one would 
be permitted to know she thought, perhaps not even himself 
‘They’ve done their best to make it harder foi you haven’t they >T 
he said 

‘Yes I was counting on Colorado to save the 1 augart system 
Now its up to me to save Colorado Nine months from now Dan 
Conway will dose his road If mine isn t ready, it won t be any use 
finishing it You can’t leave, those men without tiansportation fin a 
single day let alone a week or a month At the rate they \e been 
growing, you can't slop them dead and then expect them to continue 
It’s like slamming brakes on an engine coing two hundred miles 
an hour ’ 

* I know ’ 

“I can run a good railroad 1 can't run it across a continent ol 
sharccroppci s who’re not good enough to glow turnips successfully 
I’ve got to have men like Fills Wyatt to produce something to fill 
the trains I run So I’ve got to give him a tiain and a tiack nine 
months from now, it I have to blast all the rv.st ol us into hell to 
do id” 

He smiled, amused ‘You h el very strongly about il don’t you'* ‘ 
“Don t you > ’ 

He would not answer but merely held the smile 

‘Aren t you concerned about it *” she asked, almost angrily 

‘No ” ' 

“Jhen you don’t realize what it means*'” 

4 I realize that I’m going to get the rail rolled and you’re going to 
gel the track laid in nine months ” < 

She smiled, relaxing, weanly and a little guiltily “Yes I know we 
will I know it’s useless— getting angry at people like Jim and his 

K4 



friends. We haven’t any time for it. First, I have to undo what they’ve 
done. Then afterwards” — she stopped, wondering, shook her head 
and shrugged — “afterwards, they won’t matter.” 

“That’s right. They won’t. When 1 heard about that Anti-dog-eat- 
dog business, it made me sick. But don’t worry about the goddamn 
bastards.” The two words sounded shockingly violent, because his 
face and voice remained calm. “You and I will always be there to 
save the country from the consequences of their actions.” He got 
up: he said, pacing the office, “Colorado isn’t going to be stopped. 
You’ll pull it through. Then Dan Conway will be back, and others. 
All that lunacy is temporary. It can’t last. It’s demented, so it has to 
defeat itself. You and I will just have to work a little harder for a 
while, that’s all.” 

She watched his tall figure moving across the office. The office 
suited him; it contained nothing but the few pieces of furniture he 
needed, all ol them harshly simplified down to their essential pur- 
pose. all of them exorbitantly expensive in the quality of materials 
and the skill of design. The room looked like a motor — a motor held 
within the glass case of broad windows. But she noticed one aston- 
ishing detail, a vase ot jade that stood on top of a filing cabinet. The 
vase was a solid, dark green stone carved into plain surfaces; the 
texture of its smooth curses provoked an irresistible desire to touch 
it. It seemed startling in that office, incongruous with the sternness 
of the rest: it was a touch ol sensuality. 

“Colorado is a great place,' he said. “It's going to be the greatest 
m the counity You’re not sure that I’m concerned about it? Chat 
state’s becoming one of my best customers, as you ought to know if 
you take time to read the reports on your freight traffic.” 

“I know I read them *’ 

*Tvc been thinking of building a plant there in a tew years. To 
save them your transportation charges.” He glanced at her, “You’ll 
lose an awful lot of steel freight, tf I do.” 

“Go ahead. I’ll be satisfied with cairying vour supplies, and the 
groceries tor your workers, and the freight of the factories that will 
follow you there — and perhaps I won’t have rime to notice that I’ve 
lost your steel . . . What ate you laughing at?” 

“It’s wonderful.” 

“What?” 

“The way you don't react as everybody else does nowadays.” 

“Still, I must admit that tor the time being you’re the most impor- 
tant single shipper ot Taggart Transcontinental.” 

“Don’t you suppose I know it?” 

“So I can't understand why Jim — ” She stopped 

“—tries his best to harm my business? Because your brother Jim 
is a fool.” 

“He is. But it’s more than that. There’s something worse than 
stupidity about it.” 

“Don’t waste time trying to figure him out. Let him spit. He’s no 
danger to anyone. People like Jim Taggart just clutter up the world.” 

“I suppose so.” 


85 



“Incidentally, what would you have done if I’d said I couldn’t 
deliver your rails sooner 

“I would have torn up sidmgs or closed some branch line any 
branch line, and I would have used the rails to hmsh the Rio Norte 
track on time ’ 

He chuckled ‘I hats why 1 m not worried about laggail trans- 
continental But you won’t have to stait getting rati out ot old sidmgs 
Not so long as I m in business 

She thought suddenly that she was wrong about his lack ot emo 
(ton the hidden undertone ot his manna was enjoyment She teal 
l/ed that she had always fell a sense of light-hearted relaxation m 
his presence and known that he shared it He was the only man she 
knew to whom she could speak without strain or elfort I his, she 
tliought, was a mmd she respected an adveisaiy worth matching 
\ct there had always been an odd sense ot distance between them 
the sense ot a closed door there was an unpcisonal qiuhty in his 
manner something within him that could not be re tched 

He had stopped at the window He stood tor i moment looking 
out Do you know that the (irst load of rail is being ddiurtd to 
you today } he asked 
Ot course I know it 
C omc here 

She approachtd him He pointed siientlv l ai m (he distance be 
yond the mill structures >lie saw a string ol gondol is waiting on a 
siding Ihc bridge ol in overhead crane cut the sk\ above them 
I he crane was moving Its huge magnet held i load ot rails glued 
to a disk by the soL powu ol contact Ihcre was no tnct of sun 
m the grav spread ot cloud > yet the rails glistened as it the metal 
caught light out of space l he metal was a greenish blue Ihc gieat 
chain stopped over i car descended jerked in a brie! spasm and letl 
the rails m the ear I he crane moved back in majestu mdifterence 
it looked like the giant drawing of a gcomttmal theorem moving 
above the men and the earth 

They stood at the window watching silently intently She did not 
speak until another load of green blue met il came moving icross 
the sky Ihen the hist words she said were rot about rail tra k or 
an order completed on time She said as if greeting i new phenomc 
non of nature 
‘Reardcn Metal 

He noticed that, but said nothing He glanced at her then turned 
back to the window 
‘ Hank this is great 
4 Yes 

He said it simply openly There was no Haltered pleasure in his 
voice and no modesty Ibis she kntw was a tnbtate to her the 
rarest one person could pay another the tribute o| feeling free to 
acknowledge one’s own greatness, knowing that it li understood 
She said 4 When 1 think of what that metal can do, what it will 
make possible Hank, this is the most important thing happening 
in the world today, and none of them know it ” 

*‘We know it ’ 


86 



They did not look at each other They stood watching the crane 
On the tront of the locomotive in the distance, she could distinguish 
the letters TI She could distinguish the rails of the busiest industrial 
siding of the Taggart system 

4 As soon as I can hnd a plant able to do it she said ‘I’m going 
to order Diesels made ot Reardon Metal 

You 11 need them How fast do you run your trams on the Rio 
Norte track* 

Now* We it lucky if we manage to make twenty miles an hour ” 
He pointed at the ears When that rail is laid you 11 be able to 
run trains at two hundred and fitly it you wish 

1 will m a tew yeais when we II have cars of Rearden Metal, 
which will be half the weight of steel and twice as safe 

You II have to look out tor the airlines Were woiking on a 
plane of Rearden Metal It will weigh practically nothing and litt 
anything You II see the dty ot long haul heavy freight air traffic * 

1 vc been thinking ot what thit metal will do tor motors any 
motois and what sort ot thing one can design now 

Have you thought ol what it will do tor chicken wire* Just plain 
chicken wiic fences made of Rearden Metal that will cost a few 
pennies a mile and last two hundred years And kitchenware that 
will be bought at the dime store md pissed on from generation to 
generation And ocean Imeis that one wont be able to dent with 
i toipedo 

Did 1 tell you that I m having tests made of communications wire 
ot Real den Metal* 

I m making so many tests tint 1 It never get through showing 
people what can be done with it and how to do it 

l hey spoke ol the metal and ol ttu possibilities which they could 
not exhaust It was as if they were standing on a mountain top 
seeing a limitless plain below and roads open in all directions But 
they merelv spoke of mithematical figures of weights pressures 
resistances costs 

She had forgotten hci brothel and his National Alliance She had 
forgotten every problem person and even! behind her thes had 
always been clouded in hei sight to be hurried past to be brushed 
aside nevei final never quite red I his was reality she thought this 
stnse ol clear outlines of purpose oi lightness of hope ITm was 
the way she had expected to live -she had wanted to spend no hour 
md take no action that would mean less than this 
She looked at him in the exact moment when he turned to look 
at her Ihcy stood very close to each othei She saw in his eyes 
that he felt as she did If joy is the aim and the core oi existence, 
she thought and it that which has the powei to give one joy is always 
guarded as one's deep< st secret then they had seen each other naked 
in that moment 

He made a step back and said in a strange tone of dispassionate 
wonder. We're a couple of blackguards, aren t we**' 

‘Why 9 

4 We haven’t any spiritual goals or qualities All we’re after is 
material things I hat’s all we care for ” 

87 



She looked at him* unable to understand. But he was looking past 
her* straight ahead* at the crane in the distance. She wished he had 
hot said it. The accusation did not trouble her, she never thought of 
herself m such terms and she was completely incapable ol experienc- 
ing a feeling of fundamental guilt. But she felt a vague apprehension 
which she could not define, the suggestion that there was something 
of grave consequence in whatever had made him say it, something 
dangerous to him. He had not said it casually. But there had been 
no feeling in his voice, neither plea nor shame. He had said it indif- 
ferently, as a statement of fact. 

Then, as she watched him, the apprehension vanished. He was 
looking at his mills beyond the window; there was no guilt in his 
face, no doubt, nothing but the calm of an inviolate self-confidence 

“Dagny,” he said, “whatevei we are, it’s we who move the world 
and it’s we who’ll pull it through ” 

Chapter V THE CLIMAX OF THE D'ANCONIAS 

The newspaper was the first thing she noticed It was clutched tightly 
in Eddie's hand, as he entered her office. She glanced up at his lace: 
it was tense and bewildered 

“Dagny, aie you verv busv?” 

■Why?” 

“I know that you don’t like to talk about him But there's some 
thing here 1 think you ought to see.” 

She extended her hand silently foi the newspaper. 

The story on the front page announced that upon taking over the 
San Sebastian Mines, the government of the People’s State of Mexico 
had discovered that they were worthless— blatantly, totally, hope- 
lessly vyorthless. There was nothing to justify the five years of work 
and the millions spent, nothing but empty excavations, laboriously 
cut. The few ttaces of copper were not worth the effort of extracting 
them No great deposits of metal existed or could be expected to 
exist there, and there were no indications that could have permitted 
anyone to be deluded. The government of the People’s State of 
Mexico was holding emergency sessions about their discovery, in an 
uproar of indignation, they felt that they had been cheated. 

Watching her, Eddie knew that Dagny sat looking at the newspa- 
per long after she had finished reading. He knew that he had been 
right to feel a hint of fear, even though he could not tell what fright- 
ened him about that story 

He waited. She raised her head She did not look 3 1 him. Her eyes 
were fixed, intent in concentration, as if trying to diicern something 
at a great distance. 

He said, his voice low, “Franctsco is not a fool. Vjfhatever else he 
may be, no matter what depravity he’s sunk to — add I’ve given up 
trying to figure out why— he is not a fool, He couldn’t have made a 
mistake of this kind. It is not possible. 1 don’t understand it “ 

“I’m beginning to.” 



She sat up, jolted upright by a sudden movement that ran through 
her body like a shudder. She said: 

“Phone him at the Wayne-Falkland and tell the bastard that 1 
want to see him/’ 

“Dagny,” he said sadly, reproachfully, “it’s Frisco d’Anconia.” 

“It was.” 

* + 

She walked through the early twilight of the city streets to the 
Wayne-Falkland Hotel. ‘He says, any tune you wish,” Eddie had 
told her. The first lights appeared in a lew' windows high under the 
clouds. The skyscrapers looked like abandoned lighthouses sending 
teeble, dying signals out into an empty sea where no ships moved 
any longer. A few snowflakes came down, past the dark windows of 
empty stoics, to melt m the mud of the sidewalks. A string of red 
lanterns cut the street, going oft into the murky distance. 

She wondered why she felt that she wanted to run, that she should 
be running: no, not down this street: down a green hillside in the 
blazing sun to the road on the edge of the Hudson, at the foot of 
the Taggart estate. That was the way she always ran when Eddie 
yelled, “It’s Frisco d’Ancoma’” and they both flew down the hill to 
the car appioaching on the road below 

He was the onlv guest whose arrival was an event in their child- 
hood, then biggest e\cnt. I he running to meet him had become part 
ol a contest among the three ol them. There was a birch tree on the 
hillside, halfway between the road and the house: Dagny and Eddie 
tried to get past the tree, before Francisco could race up the hill to 
meet them. On all the many days ol his arrivals, in all the many 
summers, they never reached the birch tree: Francisco reached it first 
and stopped them when he was way past it. Francisco always won, 
as he always won eveiy thing. 

His parents weie old tnends of the Taggart family. He was an 
only son and he was being brought up all over the world; his father, 
it was said, wanted him to consider the world as his future domain. 
Dagny and Eddie could never be certain ot where he would spend 
his winter: but once a year, every summer, a stern South American 
tutor brought him for a month to the Taggart estate. 

Francisco found it natural that the Taggart children should be 
chosen as his companions: they were the crown heirs of Taggart 
Transcontinental, as he was of d’Anconia Copper. “We are the only 
aristocracy left in the world— the aristocracy of money,” he said to 
Dagny once, when he was fourteen. “It's the only real aristocracy, 
if people understood what it means, which they don’t.” 

He had a caste system of his own. to him, the Taggart children 
were not Jim and Dagny, but Dagny and Eddie. He seldom volun- 
teered to notice Jim’s existence. Eddie asked him once, “Francisco, 
you’re some kind of very high nobility, aren’t you?” He answered, 
“Not yet. The reason my family has lasted for such a long time is 
that none of us has ever been permitted to think he is bom a d’Ait- 
conia. We are expected to become one.” He pronounced his name 
as if he wished his listeners to be struck in the face and knighted by 
the sound of it. 


89 



Sebastian d’Ancoma, his ancestor, had left Spain many centuries 
ago, at a time when Spam was the most powerful country on earth 
and his was one of Spam s proudest hgures He left because the 
lord of the Inquisition did not approve of his manner of thinking 
and suggested, at a court banquet, that he change it Sebastian d’An- 
coma threw the contents ot his wine glass at the tace ot the lord ot 
the Inquisition, and escaped before he could be seized He left be- 
hind him his fortune his estate his marble palace and the girl he 
loved- and he sailed to a new world 
His first estate in Argentina was a wooden shack m the foothills 
ol the Andes I he sun bla/ed like a beacon on the silvci coat of 
arms of the d’Ancomas, nailed over the door ol the shack while 
Sebastian d’Anconia dug tor the copper ot his hrst mine He spent 
years, pickax m hand, breaking rock from sunrise till darkness, with 
the help of a few stray derelicts deserters from the armies ot his 
countrymen, escaped convicts starving Indians 
Fifteen years after he left Spain, Sebastian d Antonia sent lor the 
girl he loved she had waited for him When she arrived she tound 
the silver coat of arms above the entrance ot a marble palace the 
gardens of a great estate, and mountains slashed by pits ot red ore 
in the distance He carried her m his arms across the threshold of 
his home He looked younger than when she had seen him last 
“My ancestors and jours Francisco told Dagny would have 
liked each other 

Through the years of her childhood Dagny lived in the luture 
in the world she expected to tind where she would not have to feel 
contempt or boredom But tor one month each year she was free 
For one month, she could live in the present When she raced down 
the hill to meet Francisco d’ \ncoma it was a release from prison 
‘Hi, Slug’ 

“Hi Frisco’” 

They had both resented their nicknames at hrst She had asked 
him angnlv What do you think you mean He had answered In 
case you don’t know it ‘Slug means a great fire m a locomotive 
firebox ” “Where did you pick that up > ‘ From the gentlemen along 
the Taggart iron ” He spoke live languages and he spoke t nglish 
without a trace of accent a precise cultured Fnghsh deliberately 
mixed with slang She had retaliated bv calling him I risco He had 
laughed, amused and annoyed ‘ft you barbarians had to degrade 
the name of a great utv ol yours you could at least refrain from 
doing it to me “ But they had grown to like the nicknames 

U had started \n the days of then second summer together, when 
he was twelve years old and she was ten That summer, Fnsco began 
vanishing every morning for some purpose nobody could discover 
He went off on his bicycle before dawn and returned m time to 
appear at the white and crystal table' set tor lunch on the terrace, 
his manner courteously punctual and a little too innocent He 
laughed, refusing to answer, when Dagny and bddie questioned him 
They tned to follow him once, through the cold, prc-motning dark- 
ness, but they gave it up, no one could track him when he did not 
want to be tracked. 


90 



After a while, Mrs. Taggart began to worry and decided to investi- 
gate. She never learned how he had managed to by-pass all the child- 
labor laws, but she found Francisco working — by an unofficial deal 
with the dispatcher — as a call boy for Taggart Transcontinental, at 
a division point ten miles away. The dispatcher was stupefied by her 
personal visit; he had no idea that his call boy was a house guest of 
the Taggarts. The boy was known to the local railroad crews as 
Frankie, and Mrs. Taggart preferred not to enlighten them about his 
full name. She merely explained that he was working without his 
parents' permission and had to quit at once. The dispatcher was 
sorry to lose him; Frankie, he said, was the bCvSt call boy they had 
ever had. “I’d sure like to keep him on. Maybe we could make a 
deal with his parents?" he suggested. *Tm afraid not,” said Mrs, 
Taggart faintly. 

"Francisco.” she asked, when she brought him home, "what would 
your father say about this, it he knew 0 ” 

”Mv lather would ask whether I was good at the job or not That's 
all he'd want to know." 

"Come now, Fm serious ” 

Francisco was looking at her politely, his eouiteous manner sug- 
gesting centuries of breeding and drawing rooms; but something in 
his eyes made her feel uncertain about the politeness. "I ast winter,” 
he answered, "I shipped out as a cabin boy on a cargo steamer that 
carried d'Anconia copper. My lather looked toi me for three months, 
but that's all he asked me when l came back ” 

"So that’s how you spend >oui winters?” said Jun Taggart. Jim's 
smile had a touch ol liiumph, the triumph ot finding cause to feel 
contempt 

"That was last winter.” Francisco answered pleasantly, with no 
change in the innocent, casual tone of his voice. "The winter before 
last l spent in Madiid, at the home of the Duke ot Alba.” 

"Why did you want to work on a railroad/” asked Dagny. 

They stood looking at each other hers was a glance of admiration, 
his of mockery; but it was not the mockery of malice — it was the 
laughter of a salute. 

"To learn what's it's like, Slug,” he answered, "and to tell you 
that I've had a job with Taggart Transcontinental befotc you did.” 

Dagny and luldie spent their winters trying to master some new 
skill, in older to astonish Francisco and beat him, for once. They 
never succeeded. When they showed him how to hit a ball with a 
bat, a game he had never played before, he watched them for a few 
minutes, then said, ‘i think 1 get the idea Let me try.” He took the 
bat and sent the ball flying over a line ot oak tiees far at the end 
ot the field. 

When Jim was given a motorboat for his birthday, they all stood 
on the river landing, watching the lesson, while an instructor showed 
Jim how to run it. None of them had ever driven a motorboat before. 
The sparkling white craft, shaped like a bullet, kept staggering clum- 
sily across the water, its wake a long record of shivering, its motor 
choking with hiccoughs, while the instructor, sealed beside him, kept 
seizing the wheel out of Jim's hands. For no apparent reason, Jim 

91 



raised his head suddenly and yelled at Francisco, “Do >ou think you 
can do it any better 7 ” “1 can do it ” ‘Try it 1 ” 

When the boat came back and its two occupants stepped out, 
Francisco slipped behind the wheel “Wait a moment,” he said to 
the instructor, who remained on the landing “Let me take a look 
at this ” Then, before the instructor had time to move the boat shot 
out to the middle of the river, as if tired Irom a gun It was streaking 
away beiore they giasped what they were seeing As it went shrink- 
ing mto the distance and sunlight, Dagnv’s picture ot it was three 
straight lines its wake the long shriek oi its motor and the aim of 
the driver at its wheel 

She noticed the stiance expression ot her fathers face as he looked 
at the vanishing speedboat He said nothing, he just stood looking 
She remembered that she had seen him look that way once before 
It was when he inspected a complex system of pulleys which Fran- 
cisco, aged twelve, had erected to make an elevator to the top of a 
rock, he was teaching Daeny and Eddie to dive from the rock into 
the Hudson Franciscos notes of calculations were still scattered 
about on the ground her lather picked them up looked at them, 
then asked, “Francisco how many years ot algebra have you had 7 ’ 
“Two years “ 4 Who taught you to do this ^ 1 4 Oh, that’s just some 
thing I hgured out * She did not know that what her father held on 
the crumpled sheets of paper was the crude version of a differen- 
tial equation 

The heirs of Sebastian d’Ancoma had been an unbroken line ot 
first sons, who knew how to bear his name It was a tradition of the 
family that the man to disgrace them would be the heir who died 
leaving the d Anconia loitune no greater than he had received it 
Throughout the generations that disgrace had not come An Argen 
tinian legend said that the hand of a d Anconia had the miraculous 
power of the saints — onl> it was not the power to heal, but the power 
to produce 

The d’Artconia heirs had been men of unusual ability, but none 
of them could match what Francisco d Anconia promised to become 
It was as if the centuries had sifted the famil> s qualities through a 
fine mesh, had discarded the irrelevant, the inconsequential the 
weak, and had let nothing through except pure talent as if chance, 
for once, had achieved an entity devoid ot the accidental 

Francisco could do anything he undertook, he could do it better 
than anyone else and he did it without effort 1 here was no boasting 
in his manner and consciousness, no thought of comparison His 
attitude was not “1 can do it better than you,” but simply “1 can 
do it ” What he meant by doing was doing superlatively. 

No matter what discipline was required of him by Jus father’s 
exacting plan for his education, no matter what subject he was or- 
dered to study, Franusco mastered it with effortless amusement His 
father adored him, but concealed it carefully, as he concealed the 
pnde of knowing that he was bringing up the most brilharst phenome- 
non of a brilliant family line Francisco, it was said, wai to be the 
Climax of the d’Ancomas 

“I don’t know what sort of motto the d’Ancomas have on their 

92 



family crest,” Mrs Taggart said once, “but I’m sure that Francisco 
will change it to ‘What for?’ ” It was the fust question he asked 
about any activity proposed to him— and nothing would make him 
act, if he found no valid answer He flew through the days of his 
summer month like a rocket, but it one stopped him m midflight, he 
could always name the purpose of his every random moment Two 
things were impossible to him to stand still or to move aimlessly 

*Let\ find out” was the motive he gave to Dagny and Eddie for 
anything he undertook, 01 “Ixt’s make it ” These were his only 
lorms ol enjoyment 

‘ 1 can do it ” he said, when he was building his elevator, clinging 
to the side of a cliff driving metal wedges into rock, his arms moving 
with an expert’s thythm, drops of blood slipping, unnoticed, from 
under a bandage on his wrist “No, we can’t take turns, Eddie, you’re 
not big enough vet to handle a hammer Just cart the weeds off and 
ke'ep the wav clear tor me. I’ll do the test What blood } Oh, 
that s nothing just a cut J got yesterday Dagny run to the house 
and bring me a clean bandage 

Jim watched them Ihev Jett him alone, but they often saw him 
standing in the distance watching Francisco with a peculiar kind 
of intensity 

He seldom spoke in I rancisco s piesence But hc‘ would corner 
Digny and he would smile derisive 1\ saying All those* airs you put 
on pretending that you ie an iron woman with a mind ot her own 1 
\ou re a spineless dishrat> 1 hat s all sou aie It s disgusting the way 
you let that conceited punk ordei sou about He can twist vou 
Jiound his little finger Vou hasen t any pride at all The way you 
run when he whistles and wait on him’ Whs don’t you shine his 
shoes* Because he* hasn t told me to’ she answered 

1 rancisco could win any game in any local contest He noser on 
tcred contests He could have iuled tho |umoi country club He never 
came within sight of their clubhouse ignoring then eage*r attempts 
to enroll the most famous heir m the world Dagny and Eddie were 
his onlv luuuis I hey could not tell whether they owned him or 
were owned bv him completely, it made no difference either concept 
made them happy 

The three of them set out tvery morning on adventures ol their 
own kmd Once an elderly professor of literature Mrs laggart’s 
Iriend saw them on top of a pile in a junk yaid dismantling the 
cauass ol an automobile He stopped shook his head and said to 
l rancisco ‘A young man of sour position ought to spend his time 
in libraries, absorbing the culture ol the world ’ ‘ What do you think 
I’m doing asked fianusco 

There were no lactones m the neighborhood but Francisco taught 
Daeny and 1 dtiio to steal rides on laggart tiams to distant towns, 
where they climbed fences into mill yards or hung on window sills, 
watching machinery as other chitdicn watched movies ‘When I run 
d' Antonia Topper ” said Francisco They never had to explain 

the rest to each other, they knew each other's goal and motive 

Railroad conductors taught them, once in a while Then a station- 
master a hundred miles away would telephone Mis laggart ‘We've 

9 } 



£ 0 t three young tramps here who say that they are— ’ Yes Mrs 
Faggart would sigh, ‘ they are Please send them back 
"Francisco, Eddie asked him once as they stood by the tracks 
ot the Taggart station you ve been just about everywhere m the 
world What’s the most important thing on earth* This answered 
Francisco pointing to the emblem H on the front of an engine He 
added, I wish l could have mti N it Taggart 
He noticed Dagny s glance at him He said nothing else But mm 
utes later when the\ went on through the woods down a narrow 
path of damp earth ferns and sunlight lu said Dagny 1 11 always 
bow to a coat of arms l ll ilways worship the symbols ot nobility 
Am I not supposed to be an aristocrat’ Only l don l give a damn 
for moth eaten turrets and tenth hand unicorns l he coats of arms 
ot our day are to be found on billboards and in the ids ol populat 
magazines What do you me in ’ isked I ddie Industrial trade 
marks Eddie he answered l raneiseo w is fifteen yens old th it 
summer 

When l run d Antonia Coppu l m studying mining and 

mineralogy because l must be indy foi the time when 1 lun d An 
coma Coppei Im studying electric tl engineering because 

power compimes are the best customers ol d Antonn Loppet 
I m going to study phtlosoph\ bee uise I 11 net d it to protect d An 
coma C opper 

Don t vou evu think ot anvthing but d \ncom i C opper’ hm 
asked him onet 
No 

It seems to me that theie m othei things in the world 
Let others think iboul them 
Isn t thU i ven selfish ittitude 1 
It is 

Wlnt aie vou itter ’ 

Money 

Don t vou have enough ’ 

In his lifetime every one of mv meestors r used the production 
of d Aneonia C opper b\ ibout ten pel cent 1 intend to ruse it b\ 
one hundred 

What for 9 hm asked in soeistie unit ition of I r meiseo s voice 
When I die I hope to go to heaven whatevei the hell th it is 
and l want to be able to at toed the price ot ldnussion 
\irtue is the price ot admission Jim sud haughtily 
thdts what I mean James So I w int to be prepared to claim 
the greatest virtue of all that l was a man who made money 
Any grafter can m ike money 

James you ought to diseover some div that words have in 
exact meaning 

Francisco smiled it was a smile of radiant mocker^ Watching 
them Dagny thought suddenly of the difference betwe^i Francisco 
and her brother Jim Both of thtm smiled derisively Bflt l raneiseo 
seemed to laugh at things because he saw something mfcth greater 
Jim laughed as if he wanted to let nothing remain great 
She noticed the pirticular quality of Franciscos smil$ again, one 



night* when she sat with him and Eddie at a bonfire they had built in 
the woods. The glow of the lire enclosed them within a fence of broken, 
moving strips that held pieces of tree trunks, branches and distant 
stars. She felt as if there were nothing beyond that fence, nothing but 
black emptiness, with the hint of some breath -stopping, frightening 
promise . , . like the future. But the future, she thought, would be 
like Francisco’s smile, there was the key to it, the advance warning 
of its nature— in his face in the firelight under the pine branches — 
and suddenly she felt an unbearable happiness, unbearable because 
it was too full and she had no way to express it. She glanced at 
Eddie. He was looking at Francisco, In some quiet way of his own, 
Eddie felt as she did. 

“Why do you like Francisco?” she asked him weeks later, when 
Francisco was gone. 

Eddie looked astonished; it had never occurred to him that the 
teeling could be questioned. He said, “He makes me feel safe.” 

She said, “He makes me expect excitement and danger.” 

Francisco was sixteen, next summer, the day when she stood alone 
with him on the summit of a cliff by the river, their shorts and shirts 
torn in their climb to the top. They stood looking down the Hudson; 
they had heard that on clear days one could see New York in the 
distance. But they saw only a haze made of three different kinds of 
light merging together: the river, the sky and the sun. 

She knelt on a rock, leaning forward, trying to catch some hint of 
the city, the wind blowing her hair acioss her eyes. She glanced back 
over her shoulder ~ and saw that Francisco was not looking at the 
distance, he stood looking at her. It was an odd glance, intent and 
unsmiling. She remained still (or a moment, her hands spread flat 
on the rock, her arms tensed to support the weight of her body; 
inexplicably, his glance made her aware of her pose, of her shoulder 
showing tluough the torn shirt, of her long, scratched, sunburned 
legs slanting from the lock to the ground. She stood up angrily and 
backed away from him. And while throwing her head up, resentment 
in her eyes to meet the sternness in his, while feeling certain that 
his was a glance of condemnation and hostility, she heard herself 
asking him, a tone of smiling defiance in her voice: 

"What do you like about me?” 

He laughed; she wondered, aghast, what had made her say it. He 
answered, “There’s what 1 like about you,” pointing to the glittering 
rails of the Taggart station in the distance, 

“It's not mine,” she said, disappointed. 

“What 1 like is that it’s going to be.” 

She smiled, conceding his victory by being openly delighted. She 
did not know why he had looked at her so strangely; but she felt 
that he had seen some connection, which she could not grasp, be- 
tween her body and something within her that would give her the 
strength to rule those rails some day. 

He said brusquely, “Let's sec if we can see New York,” and jerked 
her by the arm to the edge of the cliff. She thought that he did not 
notice that he twisted her arm in a peculiar way, holding it down 
along the length of his side; it made her stand pressed against him, 

95 



and she felt the warmth of the sun in the skin of his legs against 
hers. They looked far out into the distance, but they saw nothing 
ahead except a haze of light. 

When Francisco left, that summer, she thought that his departure 
was like the crossing of a frontier which ended his childhood: he was 
to start college, that fall. Her turn would come next. vShe felt an 
eager impatience touched by the excitement of fear; as it he had 
leaped into an unknown danger. It was like the moment, years ago, 
when she had seen him dive first from a rock into the Hudson, had 
Seen him vanish under the black water and had stood, knowing that 
he would reappear in an instant and that it would then be her turn 
to follow 

She dismissed the tear; dangeis, to Francisco, were merely oppor 
tunities for another biilliant performance: there were no battles he 
amid lose, no enemies to beat him. And then she thought of a 
remark she had heard a few years earlier. It was a strange remark - 
and it was strange that the words had remained in her mind, even 
though she had thought them senseless at the time. The man who 
said it was an old professor of mathematics, a friend of her father, 
who came to their country house tor just that one visit. She liked 
his face, and she could still see the peculiar sadness in his eyes when 
he said to her father one evening, siUing on the terrace in the fading 
light, pointing to Francisco's figure in the garden, "I hat boy is vul- 
nerable. He has too great a capacity for joy. What will he do with 
it in a world where there’s so little occasion for it?" 

Francisco went to a great American school, which his father had 
chosen lor him long ago. It was the most distinguished institution of 
learning left in the world, the Patrick Henry University ot Cleveland. 
He did not come to visit her in New York, that winter, even though 
he was only a night’s journey away They did not write to each other, 
they had never done it. But she knew that he would come back to 
the country for one summer month 

There were a few times, that winter, when she felt an undefined 
apprehension: the professor’s words kept returning to her mind, as 
a warning which she could not explain. She dismissed them. When 
she thought of Francisco, she felt the steadying assurance that she 
would have another month as an advance against the future, as a 
proof that the world she saw ahead was real, even though it was not 
the world ot those around her. 

"Hi, Slug!" 

"Hi, Frisco!" 

Standing on the hillside, in the first moment of seeing him again, 
she grasped suddenly the nature of that world which they, together, 
held against all others. It was only an instant’s paused she felt her 
cotton skirt beating in the wind against her knees, fell the sun on 
her eyelids, and the upward thrust of such an immense relief that 
she ground her feet into the grass under her sandals,) because she 
thought she would nse. weightless, through the w<ml. 

It was a sudden sense of freedom and safety— because she realized 
that she knew nothing about the events of his life, had itever known 
and would never need to know. The world of ehance+~of families, 

% 



meats, schools, people, of aimless people dragging the load of some 
unknown guilt— was not theirs, could not change him, could not mat- 
ter He and she had never spoken of things that happened to them, 
but only ot what they thought and of what they would do . She 
looked at him silently, as if a voice within her were saying Not the 
things that are, but the things we’ll make We are not to be 
stopped, you and [ Forgive me the fear if 1 thought I could lose 
you to them forgive me the doubt, they’ll never reach you— HI 
never be afraid for you again 

He, too, stood looking at her for a moment- and it seemed to her 
that it was not a look of greeting after an absence, but the look of 
someone who had thought of her every day of that year She could 
not be certain, it was only an inslant so brief that just as she caught 
it he was turning to point at the birch tiee behind him and saying 
in the tone of their childhood game 

I wish you’d Icatn to run faster 1 II always have to wait for you ” 

‘ Will you wait for me 9 ” she asked gaily 
He answered, without smiling, ‘Always 

As they went up the hill to the house, he spoke to Fddie, while 
she walked silently by his side She felt that there was a new reti- 
cence between them which, strangely was a new kind of intimacy 
She did not question him about the university Days later, she 
asked him only whethu he liked it 

Ihc\ re teaching a lot ot drivel nowadays * he answered, “but 
thert arc a tew courses I like ’ 

Hav< >ou made anv fnends there * ’ 

‘Two ’ 

He told her nothing else 

Jim was approaching his scnioi \ear m a college m New York 
His studies had given him a manner of odd, quavering belligerence, 
as if he had found a new weapon He addressed Francisco once, 
without provocation stopping him in the middle of the lawn to say 
in a tone of aggressive seif righteousness 

1 think that now that you ve icached college age, you ought to 
learn something about ideals It’s time to forget your selfish greed 
and give some thought to voui social responsibilities, because I think 
that all those millions you’re going to inherit are not for your per- 
sona! pleasure they arc a trust for the benefit of the undu privileged 
and the poor, becauNe l think that the person who doesn’t reakrc 
this is the most depraved type of human being ’ 

Francisco answered courteously, “It is not advisable, James, to 
venture unsolicited opinions You should spare yourself the embar 
rassing discover v of their exact value to your listener” 

Dagny asked him, as they walked awa\ “Arc there many men 
like Jim m the world 9 ” 

Francisco laughed ‘A great many ’ 

“Don't you mind it*” 

“No 1 don't have to deal with them Why do you ask that?” 
“Because I think they’re dangerous in some way I don’t 
know how “ 


97 



“Good God* Dagny! Do you expect me to be afraid of an object 
like James?” 

It was days later when the> were alone, walking Through the 
woods on the shore ot the river, that she asked 

“Francisco what’s the most depraved type of human being >” 
“The man without a purpose ” 

She was looking at the straight shatts of the trees that stood against 
the great, sudden, shining spread ot space beyond The forest was 
dun and cool, but the outer branches caught the hot silver sun rays 
from the water She wondered whv she enjoyed the sight, when she 
had never taken any nonce of the country around her why she was 
so aware of her enjoyment, of her movements, ot her body m the 
process of walking She did not want to look at f ranusco She felt 
that his presence seemed more intensely real when she kept her e\cs 
away from him, almost as if the stressed awareness of hersell came 
from him. like the sunlight from the watei 

“You think you’re good don t you f he asked 
“I always did ’ she answered defiantly without tinning 
“Well, let me see you prove it Let me sec how far vou It rise with 
Taggart Transcontinental No mallei how good vou are I’ll expect 
you to wring everything you've got, trying to be still better And 
when you ve worn yourself out to reach a goal I II expect you to 
start for another ’ 

'Why do you think that I care to prove anything to \ou ? ’ she 
asked 

* Want me to answer > 

’‘No she whispered her eves tixed upon the other shore ot the 
river in the distance 

She heard him chuckling and alter a while he said ’Dagny 
there's nothing of anv impoitance tn life -except how well >ou do 
your work Nothing Only that Whatever else you are, will come 
from that It s the only measure of human value All the codes of 
ethics they 11 try to ram down your throat are just so much paper 
money pu{ out by swindlers to fleece people of their virtues 1 he 
code of competence is the only system ot morality that's on a gold 
standard When vou grow up, sou II know what 1 mean 

“1 know it now Bui Francisco why arc you and l the only 
ones who seem to know it?’ 

“Why should you care about the others }1 

“Because I like to understand things and there's something about 
people that 1 can t understand ’ 

’What } 

“Well I’ve always been unpopular m school and it didn’t bother 
me, but now I’ve discovered the reason It s an impossible kind of 
reason They dislike me not because I do things badly, but because 
I do them well They dislike me because 1 ve always h&d the best 
grades m class I don’t even have to study I always get A’s l>o you 
suppose I should try to get D’s for a change and become the most 
popular girl m school 

Francisco stopped, looked at her and slapped her fac$ 

What she telt was contained in a single instant, while the ground 

98 



rocked under her feet, in a single blast of emotion within her. She 
knew that she would have killed any other person who struck her, 
she felt the violent fury which would have given her the strength for 
it— and as violent a pleasure that Francisco had done it. She felt 
pleasure Irom the dull, hot pain in her cheek and from the taste of 
blood in the corner of her mouth. She felt pleasure in what she 
suddenly grasped about him, about herself and about his motive. 

She braced her feet to stop the di/ziness, she held her head straight 
and stood facing him in the consciousness of a new power, feeling 
herself his equal for the first time, looking at him with a mocking 
smile of tuumph. 

“Did 1 huit you as much as that'**' she asked. 

He looked astonished; the question and the smile were not those 
of a child, lie answered, “Yes- -if it pleases you.” 

“It does.” 

“Don't ever do that again. Don't crack jokes of that kind.” 

“Don’t be a fool. Whatever made you think that 1 cared about 
being popular *’’ 

“When you grow up, you'll undo stand what sort of unspeakable 
thing you said.” 

“I understand it now.” 

He turned abruptly, took out his handkerchief and dipped it in 
the water of the liver “C ome here,” he ordered. 

She laughed, stepping back 'Oh, no. I want to keep it as it is. I 
hope it swells terribly 1 like it ” 

He looked at her lor a long moment He said slowly, very ear- 
nestly, “Dagny. you’re wonderful.” 

“I thought that you always thought so.” she answered, her voice 
insolently casual. 

When she came home, she told her mother that she had cut her 
lip by falling against a rock. It was the only he she ever told. She 
did not do it to protect i ranusco, she did it because she felt, for 
some reason which she could not define, that the incident was a 
secret too precious to share. 

Next summer, when Francisco came, she was sixteen She started 
running down the hill to meet him, but stopped abruptly. He saw it, 
stopped, and they stood for a moment, looking at each other across 
the distance of a long, green slope It was he who walked up toward 
her, walked very- slowly, while she stood waiting. 

When he approached, she smiled innocently, as if unconscious of 
any contest intended or won. 

“You might like to know,” she said, “that 1 have a job on the 
railroad. Night operator at Rockdale ” 

He laughed “All right, Taggart Transcontinental, now it's a race. 
Let's see who’ll do greater honor, you— to Nat Taggart, or 1 — to 
Sebastian d’Anconia." 

Tltal winter, she stripped her life down to the bright simplicity of 
a geometrical drawing: a tew straight lines — to and from the engi- 
neering college in the city each day, to and from her job at Rockdale 
Station each night — and the closed circle of her room, a room littered 

99 



with diagrams of motors, blueprints of steel structures, and rail- 
road timetables. 

Mrs. Taggart watched her daughter in unhappy bewilderment. She 
could have forgiven all the omissions, but one: Dagny showed no 
sign of interest in men, no romantic inclination whatever. Mrs, Tag- 
gart did not approve of extremes; she had been prepared to contend 
with an extreme of the opposite kind, if necessary; she found herself 
thinking that this was worse. She felt embarrassed when she had to 
admit that her daughter, at seventeen, did not have a single admirer. 

“Dagny and Francisco d'Anconia?” she said, smiling ruefully, in 
answer to the curiosity of her friends. “Oh no. it's not a romance, 
ft’s an international industrial cartel of some kind. That’s all they 
seem to care about.” 

Mrs. Taggart heard James say one evening, in the presence of 
guests, a peculiar tone of satisfaction in his voice, “Dagny, even 
though you were named after her. you really look more like Nat 
Taggart than like that first Dagny Taggart, the famous beauty who 
was his wife.” Mrs. Taggart did not know which otfended her most: 
that James said it or that Dagny accepted it happily as a compliment. 

She would never have a chance, thought Mrs. Taggart, to form 
some conception of her own daughter. Dagny was only a figure hur- 
rying in and out of the apartment, a slim figure in a leather jacket, 
with a raised collar, a short skirt and long show-girl legs. She walked, 
cutting across a room, with a masculine, straight-line abruptness, but 
she had a peculiar grace of motion that was swift, tense and oddly, 
challengingty feminine. 

At times, catching a glimpse of Dagny’s face, Mrs. Taggart caught 
an expression which she could not quite define: it was much more 
than gaiety, it was the look of such an untouched purity of enjoyment 
that she found it abnormal, too: no young girl could be so insensitive 
to have discovered no sadness in life. Her daughter, she concluded, 
was incapable of emotion. 

“Dagny,*’ she asked once, “don’t you ever want to have a good 
time?’’ Dagny looked at her incredulously and answered, “What do 
you think I’m having?” 

The decision to give her daughter a formal debut cost Mrs. Taggart 
a great deal of anxious thought. She did not know whether she was 
introducing to New York society Miss Dagny Taggart of the Social 
Register or the night operator of Rockdale Station; she was inclined 
to believe it was more truly this last; and she felt certain that Dagny 
would reject the idea of such an occasion, She was astonished when 
Dagny accepted it with inexplicable eagerness, for once like a child. 

She was astonished again, when she saw Dagny dressed for the 
party. It was the first feminine dress she had ever worn-fa gown of 
white chiffon with a huge skirt that floated like a cloud, hfrs, Taggart 
had expected her to look like a preposterous contrast. Ddgny looked 
like a beauty. She seemed both older and more radiantly innocent 
than usual; standing in front of the mirror, she held her lead as Nat 
Taggart’s wife would have held it. 

“Dagny,” Mrs. Taggart said gently, reproachfully, “do $ou see how 
beautiful you can be when you want to?’ 

100 



'Yes,” said Dagny, without any astonishment 
The ballroom of the Way ne- Falkland Hotel had been decorated 
under Mrs Taggart's direction she had an artist’s taste, and the 
setting of that evening was her masterpiece “Dagny, there are things 
I would like you to learn to notice,” she said, “lights, colors, flowers* 
music Ihey are not as negligible as you might think” “I’ve nevet 
thought they’re negligible, ’ Dagny answered happily For once, Mrs 
Iaggarl felt a bond between them Dagny was looking at her with 
a child's grateful trust “IhevTe the things that make life beautiful,” 
said Mrs Iaggarl ' 1 want this evening to be very beautiful ior you, 
Dagny lbe lirst ball is the most romantic event ol one's life ” 

To Mrs laggart the greatest surprise was the moment when she 
saw Dagny standing under the lights looking at the ballroom TCus 
was not a child not a girl, but a woman of such confident dangerous 
power that Mrs laggart stared at hci with shocked admiration In 
an age ol casual cynical, indifferent routine among people who held 
ihtmsches as if thev wuc not flesh but metal- Dagnv’s beating 
seemed almost indecent because this was the way a woman would 
ha\c faced a balhoom centuiics ago when the act of displaying one’s 
h tlf naked body for the admualion of men was an act of daring, 
when if had meaning and but one meaning acknowledged bv all as 
a high adventure And this -thought Mrs laggart smiling was the 
mrl she had believed to be devoid of sexual eipieitv She felt an 
immense relu l md a touch ol amusement at the thought that a 
discos erv of this kind should make her feel relieved 

lh< »ehcf lasted only for i few hours At the end of the evening 
she saw Dagny in a tomci ol the biHioom sitting on a balustrade 
as it it were i fence rail hei less dmglme under the chiffon skirt as 
it she were diesseel m slacks She w is i \lkmg to i couple ot hcdpless 
young men hei lace conn mpiuously i mpty 
Neither Dagny nor Mrs 1 aggait said a woid when they rode home 
tog< ther But hours later on a sudden impulse Mrs Taggart went 
to her daughter s 100m Dagnv stood bv the window still wearing 
the white evening gown it looked like a cloud supporting a body 
that now seemed too thin tor it, a small body with sagging shoulders 
Beyond the window the clouds were gray in Ihe hrst light of 
morning 

When Dagny turned Mrs laggart saw only puzzled helplessness 
in her face the ta< e was calm but something about it made Mrs 
Taggart wish she had not wished that hei daughtci should discovei 
sadness 

Mother do they think it s exaulv in reverse ’ ’ she asked 
'What’ asked Mis Taggart bewildeied 

Ihe things you weie talking about Ihe Itghts and the flowers 
Do thev expect thosi things to make them romantic not the other 
wav around’’ 

Darling what do you mean ’ 

'Iheie wasn’t a person thcic who uijoved it she said her voice 
lifeless, ‘ or who thought or telt anything at all Ihey moved about, 
and they said the same dull things they say anvwheie I suppose they 
thought the lights would make it brilliant ’ 

101 



"Darling, you take everything too seriously One is not supposed 
to be intellectual at a hall One is simply supposed to be gay ” 
"How* By being stupid 9 

"I mean for instance didn t \ou enjoy meeting the young men*” 
"What men* I here wasn t a man thete I couldn t squash ten of 
Days later, silting at her desk at Rockdale Station feeling light 
heartedly at home Dagny thought of the partv and shrugged in 
contemptuous reproach at htr own disappointment She looked up 
it was spring and there were leaves on the tree branches m the 
darkness outside the air was still and warm She asked heiselt what 
she had expeeted trom that party She did not know But she teit it 
again here now as she sit slouched over a battered desk looking 
out into the dirkness a sense ot expectation without ob|cct rising 
through her body slowly like a warm liquid She slumped torwaid 
across the desk la/ily feeling neither exhaustion nor desire to work 
When Francisco came th it summer she told him about the parts 
and about her disappointment He listened silently looking at her 
for the tirst time with that glance ol unmovmg mockeiv which he 
rtsetvcd for others a glance tint seemed to see too mm h She tell 
as if he heard in her words moie than she knew she told him 
She saw the smic gl met m his cve* on the evening when she leit 
him too eailv lhc\ were done silting on the short ol th< nur 
She had another houi before sht was due at Rockdale I here vun 
long thm strips ol fne in the sk\ and led sp irks floating !a/il> on 
the water He hid been silent lor i long time when she rose jhruplK 
and told him that she had to go He did not try to stop her he leaned 
back his elbows m the griss and looked it her without moving his 
glance seemed to sa\ that he knew her motive Hunting tngnlv up 
the slope to the house she wondtrtd what had made her leave she 
did not know n had been i sudden resth ssness thit came from a 
feeling she did not identifv till now i feeling ol expectation 

tach night she drove the live null s trom the lountiv house to 
Rockdale She came back it dawn slept a lew hours md got up 
with the rest of the household She lelt no desire to sleep Undtcssim? 
for bed in the lust ra\s ol the sun she lelt t tense joyous causeless 
impatience to lace the div thit w is starting 

She saw Franciscos mocking gl met igun across tin net ot a 
tenms court She did not remember the beginning ot that gmic they 
had often played tenms together and he had dways won She did 
not know at what moment she dctidid that she would win this time 
When she became aware of it it was no longer a decision oi a wish 
but a quiet iury rising within he! She did not know why she had to 
win she did not know why it seemed so crucially urgently necessary 
she knew only that she had to and that she would 

It seemed casv to play it was as if her will had vanished md 
someone s power were playing for her She watched f raujpistos tig 
ure — a tall swill ligurc the suntan of his arms stressed b# his short 
white shirt sleeves She teit an arrogant pleasure in seuim the skill 
of his movements because this was the thing which she wk>uld beat 
so that his every expert gesture became her victory and t$e brilliant 
competence of his body became the triumph of hers 

102 



She felt the rising pain of exhaustion — not knowing that it was 
pain, feeling it only in sudden stabs that made her aware of some 
part of her body for an instant, to be forgotten in the next: her arm 
socket — her shoulder blades— her hips, with the white shorts sticking 
to her skin -“the muscles of her legs, when she leaped to meet the 
ball, but did not remember whether she came down to touch the 
ground again— her eyelids, when the sky went dark icd and the ball 
came at her through the darkness like a whirling white flame— the 
thin, hot wire that shot from her ankle, up her back, and went on 
shooting straight across the air, driving the ball at Francisco’s 
figure. . . . She felt an exultant pleasure — because every stab of pain 
begun in her body had to end in his, because he was being exhausted 
as she was- what she did to herself, she was doing it also to him — 
this was what he felt — this was what she drove him to — it was not 
her pain that she felt or her body, but his. 

In the moments when she saw his face, she saw that he was laugh- 
ing. He was looking at her as if he understood. He was playing, not 
to win, but to make it haider toi her — sending his shots wild to 
make her run-losing points to see her twist her body in an agonizing 
backhand — standing still, letting her think he would miss, only to let 
his arm shoot out casually at the last moment and send the bail back 
with such force that she knew she would miss it. She felt as if she 
could not move again, not evei— and it was strange to find herself 
landing suddenly at the other side of the court, smashing the ball in 
lime, smashing it as if she wished it to burst to pieces, as if she 
wished it were Francisco’s face. 

Just once more, she thought, even it the next one would crack the 
bones of her arm . . Just once more, even it the air which she 
forced down in gasps past her tight, swollen throat, would be stopped 
altogether . . . Then she felt nothing, no pain, no muscles, only the 
thought that she had to beat him. to see him exhausted, to see him 
collapse, and then she would be free to die in the next moment. 

She won. Perhaps it was his laughing that made him lose, for once. 
He walked to the net, while she stood still, and threw his racket 
across, at her feet, as it knowing that this was what she wanted. He 
walked out ot the court and fell down oil the grass of the lawn, 
collapsing, his head on his arm. 

She approached him slowly. She stood over him, looking down at 
his body stretched at her feet, looking at his sweat-drenched shirt 
and the strands of his hair spilled across his arm. He raised his head. 
His glance moved slowly up the line of her legs, to her shorts, to 
her blouse, to her eyes. U was a mocking glance that seemed to see 
straight through her clothes and through her mind. And it seemed 
to say that he had won. 

She sat at her desk at Rockdale that night, alone in the old station 
building, looking at the sky in the window. It was the hour she liked 
best, when the top panes of the window grew lighter, and the rails 
of the track outside became threads of blurred silver across the lower 
panes. She turned off her lamp and watched the vast, soundless mo- 
tion of light over a motionless earth. Tilings stood still, not a leaf 

103 



trembled on the branches, while the sky slowly lost its color and 
hec&tne an expanse that looked like a spread of glowing water. 

Her telephone was silent at this hour, almost as if movement had 
stopped everywhere along the system. She heard steps approaching 
outside, suddenly, close to the door. Francisco came in. He had never 
come here before, but she was not astonished to see him. 

“What are you doing up at this hour?” she asked. 

“I didn't feel like sleeping." 

“How did you get here? 1 didn't hear your car." 

“I walked." 

Moments passed before she realized that she had not asked him 
why he came and that she did not want to ask it. 

He wandered through the room, looking at the dusters of waybills 
that hung on the walls, at the calendar with a picture of the Taggart 
Comet caught in a proud surge of motion toward the onlooker. He 
seemed casually at home, as if he felt that the place belonged to 
them, as they always felt wherever they went together. But he did 
not seem to want to talk. He asked a few questions about her job, 
then he kept silent. 

As the light grew outside, movement grew down on the line and 
the telephone started ringing in the silence She turned to her work. 
He sat in a comer, one leg thrown over the ami of his chair, waiting. 

She worked swiftly, teelmg inordinately clear-headed. She found 
pleasure in the rapid precision of her hands. She concentrated on 
the sharp, bright sound of the phone, on the figures ot train numbers, 
car numbers, order numhers. She was conscious of nothing else 

But when a thin sheet of paper fluttered down to the floor and 
she bent to pick it up. she was suddenly as intently conscious of that 
particular moment, of herself and her own movement. She noticed 
her gray linen skirt, the rolled sleeve of her gray blouse and her 
naked arm reaching down for the paper. She felt her heart stop 
causelessly in the kind of gasp one feels in moments of anticipation. 
She picked up the paper and turned back to her desk. 

It was almost full daylight. A train went past the station, without 
stopping. In the purity of the morning light, the long line of car roofs 
melted into a silver string, and the train seemed suspended above 
the ground, not quite touching it, going past through the air. The 
floor of the station trembled, and glass rattled in the windows. She 
watched the train’s flight with a smile of excitement. She glanced at 
Francisco; he was looking at her, with the same v srmle. 

When the day operator arrived, she turned the station over to 
him, and they walked out into the morning air. 7be sun had not yet 
risen and the air seemed radiant in its stead. ,She felt no exhaustion. 
She felt as if she were just getting up. 

She started toward her car, but Francisco said, “Let’s Jvalk home. 
We’ll come for the car later," 

“All right." 

She was not astonished and she did not mind the Prospect of 
walking five miles. It seemed natural: natural to the moment's pecu- 
liar reality that was sharply clear, but cut off from everything, imme- 

104 



diate, but disconnected, like a bright island in a wall of fog, the 
heightened, unquestioning reality one feels when one is drunk. 

The road led through the woods. They left the highway for an old 
trail that went twisting among the trees across miles of untouched 
country. There were no traces of human existence around them. Old 
ruts, overgrown with grass, made human presence seem more distant, 
adding the distance of years to the distance of miles. A haze of 
twilight remained over the ground, hut in the breaks between the 
tree trunks there were leaves that hung in patches ol shining green 
and seemed to light the forest. The leaves hung still. They walked, 
alone to move through a motionless world. She noticed suddenly 
that they had not said a word tor a long time. 

They came to a clearing. It was a small hollow at the bottom of 
a shaft made of straight rock hillsides. A stream cut across the grass, 
and tree branches flowed low to the ground, like a curtain of green 
fluid. The sound of the water stressed the silence. The distant cut of 
open sky made the place seem more hidden. Far above, on the crest 
oi a hill, one tree caught the first rays of sunlight 
They stopped and looked at each other. She knew, only when he 
did it, that she had known he would. He seized her. she felt her lips 
on his mouth, felt her arms grasping him in violent answer, and knew 
for the first time how much she had wanted him to do it. 

She felt a moment's rebellion and a hint of fear. He held her, 
pressing the length of his body against hers with a tense, purposeful 
insistence, his hand moving over her breasts as if he were learning 
a proprietor’s intimacy with her body, a shocking intimacy that 
needed no consent from her, no permission. She tried to pull herself 
away, but she only leaned back against his arms long enough to see 
his face and his smile, the smile that told her she had given him 
permission long ago She thought that she must escape: instead, it 
was she who pulled his head down to find his mouth again. 

She knew that fear was useless, that he would do what he wished, 
that the decision was his, that he left nothing possible to her except 
the thing she wanted most™ -to submit. She had no conscious realiza- 
tion of his purpose, her vague knowledge of it was wiped out, she 
had no power to believe it clearly, in this moment, to believe it about 
herself, she knew only that she was afraid — yet what she felt was as 
if she were crying to him: Don't ask me for it— oh, don't ask me — 
do it! 

She braced her feet for an instant, to resist, but his mouth was 
pressed to hers and they went down to the ground together, never 
breaking their lips apart. She lay still— as the motionless, then the 
quivering object of an act which he did simply, unhesitatingly, as of 
right, the right of the unendurable pleasure it gave them. 

He named what it meant to both of them in the first words he 
spoke afterwards. He said, “We had to learn it from each other.” 
She looked at his long figure stretched on the grass beside her, he 
wore black slacks and a black .shirt, her eyes stopped on the belt 
pulled tight across his slender waistline, and she felt the slab of an 
emotion that was tike a gasp of pride, pride in her ownership of his 

105 



body, vShe tav on her back, looking up at the sky, feeling no desire to 
move or think or know that there was any time beyond this moment. 

When she came home, when she lay in bed, naked because her 
body had become an unfamiliar possession, too precious for the 
touch of a nightgown, because it gave her pleasure to feel naked 
and to feci as if the white sheets of her bed were touched by Francis- 
co’s body — when she thought that she would not sleep, because she 
did not want to rest and lose the most wonderful exhaustion she had 
ever known — her last thought was of the times when she had wanted 
to express, but found no way to do it, an instant's knowledge of a 
feeling greater than happiness, the feeling of one’s blessing upon the 
whole of the earth, the feeling of being in love with the fact that 
one exists and in this kind of world; she thought that the act she 
had learned was the way one expressed it. If this was a thought of 
the gravest importance, she did not know it, nothing could be grave 
in a universe from which the concept of pain had been wiped out, 
she was not there to weigh her conclusion; she was asleep, a faint 
smile on her face, in a silent, luminous room filled with the light 
of morning. 

That summer, she met him in the woods, in hidden corners by the 
river, on the floor of an abandoned shack, in the cellar of the house. 
These were the only times when she learned to feci a sense of 
beauty — by looking up at old wooden rafters or at the steel plate of 
an air-conditioning machine that whirred tensely, rhythmically above 
their heads. She wore slacks or cotton summer dresses, yet she was 
never so feminine as when she stood beside him, sagging in his arms, 
abandoning herself to anything he wished, in open acknowledgment 
of his power to reduce her to helplessness by the pleasure he had 
the power to give her. He taught her every manner ot sensuality he 
could invent. “Isn’t it wonderful that our bodies can give us so much 
pleasure?” he said to her once, quite simply. They were happy and 
radiantly innocent. They were both incapabie of the conception that 
joy is sin. 

They kept their secret from the knowledge of others, not as a 
shameful guilt, but as a thing that was immaculately theirs, beyond 
anyone's right of debate or appraisal. She knew the general doctrine 
on sex, held by people in one form or another, the doctrine that sex 
was an ugly weakness of man's lower nature, to be condoned regret- 
fully. She experienced an emotion of chastity that made her shrink 
not from the desires of her body, but from any contact with the 
minds who held this doctrine. 

That winter, Francisco came to see her in New York, at unpredict- 
able intervals. He would fly down from Cleveland, withoqt warning, 
twice a week, or he would vanish for months. She would sit on the 
floor of her room, surrounded by charts and blueprints, !shc would 
hear a knock at her door and snap, ‘Tm busy’” then hearja mocking 
voice ask, “Are you?” and leap to her feet to throw the floor open, 
to find him standing there. They would go to an apartment he had 
rented in the city, a small apartment in a quiet neighborhood. “Fran- 
cisco,” she asked him once, in sudden astonishment, “I’nl your mis- 
tress, am f not?” He laughed. ‘That’s what you are.” felt the 

106 



pride a woman is supposed to experience at being granted the title 
of wife. 

In the many months of his absence, she never wondered whether 
he was true to her or not; she knew he was. She knew, even though 
she was too young to know the reason, that indiscriminate desire 
and unseleetive indulgence were possible only to those who regarded 
sex and themselves as evil. 

She knew little about Francisco’s life. It was his last year in college; 
he seldom spoke of it, and she never questioned him. She suspected 
that he was working too hard, because she saw, at limes, the unnatu- 
rally bright look of his face, the look of exhilaration that comes 
from driving one’s energy beyond its limit. She laughed at him once, 
boasting that she was an old employee of Taggart Transcontinental, 
while he had not started to work for a living. He said; “My father 
refuses to let me work for d’Anconia Copper until 1 graduate. 1 ' 
“When did you learn to be obedient?’* “I must respect his wishes. 
He is the owner of d’Anconia Copper . . . He is not, however, the 
owner ol all the copper companies in the world." There was a hint 
of secret amusement in his smile. 

She did not learn the story until the next fall, when he had gradua- 
ted and returned to New York alter a visit to his father in Buenos 
Aires, Then he told her that he had taken two courses of education 
during the last lour years: one at the Patrick Henry University, the 
other in a copper toundry on the outskirts of Clc\e!amJ, “1 like to 
learn things ior myself," he said. He had started working at the 
foundry as furnace boy, when he was sixteen — and now. at twenty, 
he owned it. He acquired the first title of properly, with the aid ot 
some inaccuracy about his age. on the day when he received his 
university diploma, and he sent them both to his father. 

He showed her a photogtaph ol the foundry. It was a small, grimy 
place, disreputable with age, battered bv years of a losing struggle: 
above its entrance gate, like a new flag on the mast of a derelict, 
hung the sign: d'Ancoma Copper. 

The public relations man ol his father’s office in New York had 
moaned, outraged. “But. Don Francisco, you can't do that! What 
will the public think? That name --on a dump of this kind?" “It’s 
my name," Francisco had answered. 

When he entered his father’s office in Buenos Aires, a large room, 
severe and modern as a laboratory, with photographs of the proper- 
ties of d’Anconia Copper a* sole ornament on its walls — photographs 
of the greatest mines, ore docks and foundries in the world- -he saw, 
in the place of honor, facing his father's desk, a photograph of the 
Cleveland foundry with the new sign above its gate. 

His father’s eyes moved from the photograph to Francisco’s face 
as he stood in front of the desk. 

“Isn't it a little too soon?" his father asked. 

“1 couldn't have stood lour years of nothing but lectures." 

“Where did you gel the money for your first payment on that 
property?” 

'“By playing the New York stock market." 

"What? Who taught you to do that?” 

107 



“It is not difficult to judge which industrial ventures will succeed 
and which won't." 

“Where did you get the money to play with?" 

“From the allowance you sent me, and from my wages." 

“When did you have time to watch the stock market?" 

“While 1 was writing a thesis on the influence — upon subsequent 
metaphysical systems — of Aristotle's theory of the Immovable 
Mover." 

Francisco's stay in New York was brief, that fall. His father was 
sending him to Montana as assistant superintendent of a d’Anconia 
mine. “Oh well," he said to Dagny, smiling, “my father does not 
think it advisable to let me rise too fast. I would not ask him to take 
me on faith. If he wants a factual demonstration, I shall comply." 
In the spring, Francisco came back — as head of the New York office 
of d'Anconia Copper. 

She did not see him often in the next two years. She never knew 
where he was, in what city or on what continent, the day after she 
had seen him. fie always came to her unexpectedly — and she liked 
it, because it made him a continuous presence in her life, like the 
ray of a hidden light that could hit hei at any moment 

Whenever she saw him in his office, she thought of his hands as 
she had seen them on the wheel of a motorboat: he drove his busi- 
ness with the same smooth, dangerous, confidently mastered speed. 
But one small incident remained in her mind as a shock it did not 
fit him. She saw him standing at the window of hi** office. one eve- 
ning, looking at the brown winter twilight of the city. He did not 
move for a long time. His lace was hard and light; it had the look 
of an emotion she had never believed possible to him* ol bitter, 
helpless anger. He said, “There's something wrong in the world 
There’s always been. Something no one has ever named or ex- 
plained " He would not tell her what i( was. 

When she saw him again, no trace of that incident remained in 
his manner. It was spring and they stood together on the roof terrace 
of a restaurant, the light silk of her evening gown blowing in the 
wind against his tall figure in formal black clothes. They looked at 
the city. In the dining room behind them, the sounds of the music 
were a concert £tude by Richard Halley, Halley’s name was not 
known to many, but they had discovered it and they loved his music. 
Francisco said, “We don’t have to look for skyscrapers in the dis- 
tance, do we? We’ve reached them." She smiled and said, “I think 
we’re going past them. . . . I’m almost afraid . . . we’re on a speeding 
elevator of some kind." “Sure. Afraid of what? Let it speed. Why 
should there be a limit?" 

He was twenty-three when his father died and he went to Buenos 
Aires to take over the d’Anconia estate, now his. She did not see 
him again for three years. 

He wrote to her, at first, at random intervals. He trrule about 
d’Anconia Copper, about the world market, about issi|es affecting 
the interests of Taggart Transcontinental. His letters wer^ brief, writ- 
ten by hand, usually at night. ■ 

She was not unhappy in his absence. She, too, was taking her first 

108 



steps toward the control of a future kingdom. Among the leaders of 
industry, her father’s friends, she heard it said that one had better 
watch the young d’Ancoma heir; if that copper company had been 
great before, it would sweep the world now, under what his manage- 
ment promised to become. She smiled, without astonishment. There 
were moments when she felt a sudden, violent longing for him, but 
it was only impatience, not pain. She dismissed it, in the confident 
knowledge that they were both working toward a future that would 
bring them everything they wanted, including each other. Then his 
letters stopped. 

She was twenty-four on that day of spring when the telephone 
rang on her desk, in an office of the Taggart Building. “Dagny,” 
said a voice she recognized at once, “I’m at the Wayne-Falkland. 
Come to have dinner with me tonight. At seven.” He said it without 
greeting, as if they had parted the day before. Because it took her 
a moment to regain the art of breathing, she realized for the first 
tune how much that voice meant to her. “AH light . . . Francisco,” 
she answered. They needed to say nothing else. She thought, replac- 
ing the receiver, that his return was natural and as she had always 
expected it to happen, except that she had not expected her sudden 
need to pronounce his name or the stab of happiness she felt while 
pronouncing it. 

When she entered his hotel room, that evening, she stopped short. 
He stood in the middle of the room, looking at her — and she saw a 
smile that came slowly, involuntarily, as if he had lost the ability to 
smile and was astonished that he should regain it. He looked at hei 
incredulously, not quite believing what she was or what he felt. His 
glance was like a plea, like the cry lor help of a man who could 
never cry. At her entrance, he had started their old salute, he had 
started to say, “Hi—” but he did not finish it. Instead, after a mo- 
ment. he said, ‘You’re beautiful, Dagny.” He said it as if it hurt him. 

“Francisco, I—” 

He shook his head, not to let her pronounce the words they had 
never said to each other — even though they knew that both had said 
and heard them in that moment. 

He approached, he took her in his arms, he kissed her mouth and 
held her foi a long time. When she looked up at his face, he was 
smiling down at her confidently, derisively. It was a smile that told 
her he was in control of himself, of her, of everything, and ordered 
her to forget what she had seen in that first moment. “Hi, Slug ” 
he said. 

Feeling certain of nothing except that she must not ask questions, 
she smiled and said, “Hi, Frisco.” 

She could have understood any change, but not the things she saw. 
There was no sparkle of life in his face, no hint of amusement; the 
face had become implacable. The plea of his first smile had not been 
a pica of weakness; he had acquired an air of determination that 
seemed merciless. He acted like a man who stood straight, under 
the weight of an unendurable burden. She saw what she amid not 
have believed possible*, that there were tines of bitterness in his face 
and that he looked tortured. 


109 



“Dagny, don’t be astonished by anything 1 do,” he said, “or by 
anything I may ever do in the future.” 

That was the only explanation he granted her, then proceeded to 
act a$ if there were nothing to explain. 

She could feel no more than a faint anxiety; it was impossible to 
feel fear for his fate or in his presence. When he laughed, she thought 
they were back in the woods by the Hudson: he had not changed 
and never would. 

The dinner was served in his room. She found it amusing to face 
him across a table laid out with the icy formality pertaining to exces- 
sive cost, in a hotel room designed as a European palace. 

The Wayne-Falkland was the most distinguished hotel left on any 
continent. Its style of indolent luxury, of velvet drapes, sculptured 
panels and candlelight, seemed a deliberate contrast to its function: 
no one could afford its hospitality except men who came to New 
York on business, to settle transactions involving the world. She 
noticed that the manner ot the waiters who served theii dinner sug- 
gested a special deference to this particular guest of the hotel, and 
that Francisco did not notice it. He was indifferently at home. He 
had long since become accustomed to the fact that he was Seftor 
d’Anconia of d’Anconia Copper. 

But she thought it strange that he did not speak about his work. 
She had expected it to be his only interest, the first thing he would 
share with her He did not mention it. He led her to talk, instead, 
about her job. her progress, and what she felt for Taggart Transconti- 
nental. She spoke of it as she had always spoken to him. in the 
knowledge that he was the only one who could understand her pas- 
sionate devotion. He made no comment, but he listened intently. 

A waiter had turned on the radio for dinner music: they had paid 
no attention to it But suddenly, a crash of sound jarred the room, 
almost as if a subterranean blast had struck the walls and made them 
tremble. The shock came, not from the loudness, but from the quality 
of the sounds. It was H alley's new Concerto, recently written, the 
Fourth. 

They sat in silence, listening to the statement of icbellion— the 
anthem of the triumph of the great victims who would refuse to 
accept pain. Francisco listened, looking out at the city. 

Without transition or warning, he asked, hi:> voice oddly un- 
stressed, “Dagny, what would you say if 1 asked you to leave Taggait 
Transcontinental and let it go to hell, as it will when your brother 
takes over?” 

“What would I say if you asked me to consider the idea of commit- 
ting suicide?” she answered angrily. 

He remained silent. 

“Why did you say that?” she snapped. *1 didn’t think: you’d joke 
about it. It’s not like you.” 

There was no touch of humor in his face. He answered quietly, 
gravely, “No. Of course. 1 shouldn’t.” 

She brought herself to question him about his work. life answered 
the questions; he volunteered nothing. She repeated to h|m the com- 
ments of the industrialists about the brilliant prospects of d’Anconia 

110 



Copper under his management. ‘That’s true,” he said, his voice 
lifeless. 

In sudden anxiety, not knowing what prompted her, she asked, 
“Francisco, why did you come to New York?” 

He answered slowly, “To see a friend who called for me.” 

“Business?” 

Looking past her, as if answering a thought of his own, a faint 
smile of bitter amusement on his face, but his voice strangely soft 
and sad, he answered: 

“Yes.” 

It was long past midnight when she awakened in bed by his side. 
No sounds came from the city below. The stillness of the room made 
life seem suspended for a while. Relaxed in happiness and in com- 
plete exhaustion, she turned lazily to glance at him. He lay on his 
back, half-propped by a pillow. She saw his profile against the foggy 
glow of the night sky in the window. He was awake, his eyes were 
open. He held his mouth closed like a man lying in resignation in 
unbearable pain; bearing it, making no attempt to hide it 

She was too frightened to move. He felt her glance and turned to 
her. He shuddered suddenly, he threw off the blanket, he looked at 
her naked body, then he fell forward and buried his face between her 
breasts. He held her shoulders, hanging onto her convulsively. She 
heard the words, muffled, his mouth pressed to her skin: 

“1 can’t give it up! I can’t!” 

“What?” she whispered. 

“You.” 

“Why should — *' 

“And everything.” 

“Why should you give it up?” 

“Dagny! Help me to remain. To refuse. Even though he’s right!” 

She asked evenly. “To refuse what, Francisco?” 

He did not answer, only pressed his face harder against her. 

She lay very still, conscious of nothing but a supreme need of 
caution. His head on her breast, her hand caressing his hair gently, 
steadily, she lay looking up at the ceiling of the room, at the sculp- 
tured garlands faintly visible in the darkness, and she waited, numb 
with terror. 

He moaned, “It's right, but it’s so hard to do! Oh God. it’s so 
hard!” 

After a while, he raised his head. He sal up. He had stopped 
trembling. 

“What is it, Francisco?" 

“I can’t tell you.” His voice was simple, open, without attempt to 
disguise suffering, but it was a voice that obeyed him now. “You’re 
not ready to hear it.” 

“I want to help you.” 

“You can’t.” 

“You said, to help you refuse.” 

“1 can't refuse.” 

“Then let me share it with you.” 

He shook his head. 


111 



He sat looking down at her, as if weighing a question. Then he 
shook his head again, in answer to himself. 

“If I’m not sure I can stand it,” he said, and the strange new note 
in his voice was tenderness, “how could you?” 

She said slowly, with effort, trying to keep herself from screaming, 
“Francisco, 1 have to know.” 

“Will you forgive me? f know you’re frightened, and it’s cruel. 
But will you do this for me — will you let it go, just let it go, and 
don’t ask me anything?” 

“ 1 — ” 

“That’s all you can do for me. Will you?” 

“Yes, Francisco.” 

“Don’t be afraid for me. It was just this once. It won’t happen to 
me again. It will become much easier . . . later.” 

“If 1 could — ” 

“No. Go to sleep, dearest.” 

It was the first time he had ever used that word. 

In the morning, he faced her openly, not avoiding her anxious 
glance, but saying nothing about it. She saw both serenity and suffer- 
ing in the calm of his face, an expression like a smile of pain, though 
he was not smiling. Strangely, it made him look younger. He did not 
look like a man bearing torture now, but like a man who sees that 
which makes the torture worth bearing. 

She did not question him. Before leaving, she asked only, “When 
will 1 see you again?” 

He answered. “I don’t know. Don’t wait for me. Dagny. Next time 
we meet, you will not want to see me. I will have a reason for the 
things HI do. But I can’t tell you the reason and you will be right 
to damn me. I am not committing the contemptible act of asking 
you to take me on faith. You have to live by your own knowledge 
and judgment. You will damn me. You will be hurt. Try not to let 
it hurt you too much. Remember that I told you this and that it was 
all l could tell you.” 

She heard nothing from him or about him for a year. When she 
began to hear gossip and to read newspaper stories, she did not 
believe, at first, that they referred to Francisco d’Anconia. After a 
while, she had to believe it. 

She read the story of the party he gave on his yacht, in the harbor 
of Valparaiso; the guests wore bathing suits, and an artificial ram of 
champagne and flower petals kept falling upon the decks throughout 
the night. 

She read the story of the party he gave at an Algerian desert 
resort; he built a pavilion of thin sheets of ice and presented every 
woman guest with an ermine wrap, as a gift to be worn; for the 
occasion, on condition that they remove their wraps, then t|ieir eve* 
ning gowns, then all the rest, in tempo with the melting of Ijjhe walls. 

She Tead the accounts of the business ventures he undertook at 
lengthy intervals; the ventures were spectacularly successful and ru- 
ined his competitors, but he indulged in them as in an occasional 
sport, staging a sudden raid, then vanishing from the industrial scene 

112 



for a year or two, leaving d’Anconia Copper to the management of 
his employees. 

She read of the interview where he said* “Why should I wish to 
make money? 1 have enough to permit three generations of descen- 
dants to have as good a time as I’m having,” 

She saw him once, at a reception given by an ambassador in New 
York. He bowed to her courteously, he smiled, and he looked at her 
with a glance m which no past existed. She drew him aside. She said 
only, “Francisco, why?” “Why— what?” he asked. She turned away. 
“1 warned you,” he said. She did not try to see him again. 

She survived it. She was able to survive it, because she did not 
believe in suffering. She faced with astonished indignation the ugly 
fact of feeling pain, and refused to let it matter. Suffering was a 
senseless accident, it was not part of life as she saw it. She would 
not allow pain to become important. She had no name for the kind 
of resistance she offered, for the emotion from which the resistance 
came; but the words that stood as its equivalent in her mind were: 
It does not count — it is not to be taken seriously. She knew these 
were the words, even in the moments when there was nothing left 
within her but screaming and she wished she could lose the faculty 
of consciousness so that it would not tell her that what could not be 
true was true. Not to be taken seriously — an immovable certainty 
within her kept repeating- pain and ugliness are never to be taken 
seriously. 

She fought it. She recovered. Years helped her to reach the day 
when she could face her memories indifferently, then the day when 
she felt no necessity to face them. It was finished and of no concern 
to her any longer. 

There had been no other men in her life. She did not know 
whether this had made her unhappy. She had had no time to know. 
She found the clean, brilliant sense of life as she wanted it — in her 
work. Once, Francisco had given her the same sense, a feeling that 
belonged with her work and in her world. The men she had met 
since were like the men she met at her first ball. 

She had won the battle against her memories But one form of tor- 
ture remained, untouched by the years, the torture of the word “why?” 

Whatever the tragedy he met. why had Francisco taken the ugliest 
way of escape, as ignoble as the way of some cheap alcoholic? 'The 
boy she had known could not have become a useless coward. An 
incomparable mind could not turn its ingenuity to the invention of 
melting ballrooms. Yet he had and did. and there was no explanation 
to make it conceivable and to let her forget him in peace. She could 
not doubt the fact of what he had been; she could not doubt the 
fact of what he had become; yet one made the other impossible. At 
times, she almost doubted her own rationality or the existence of 
any rationality anywhere; but this was a doubt which she did not 
permit to anyone. Yet there was no explanation, no reason, no clue 
to any conceivable reason— and in all the days of ten years she had 
found no hint of an answer. 

No, she thought— as she walked through the gray twilight past 
the windows of abandoned shops, to the Wayne- Falkland Hotel— 

113 



fto, there could be no answer. She would not seek it. It did not 
matter now. 

The remnant of violence, the emotion rising as a thin trembling 
within her, was not for the man she was going to see; it was a cry 
of protest against a sacrilege — against the destruction ot what had 
been greatness. 

In a break between buildings, she saw the towers of the Waync- 
Fatkland. She felt a slight jolt, in her lungs and legs, that stopped 
her for an instant. Then she walked on evenly. 

By the time she walked through the marble lobby, to the elcvatoi, 
then down the wide, velvet-carpeted, soundless corridors of the 
Wayne -Falkland, she fell nothing but a cold anger that grew colder 
with every step. 

She was certain of the anger when she knocked at his door. She 
heard his voice, answering, “runic in.” She jerked the door open 
and entered. 

Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d’Anconia sat on the 
floor, playing marbles. 

Nobody ever wondered whether Francisco d’Anconia was good- 
looking or not; it seemed irrelevant, when he entered a room, it was 
impassible to look at anyone else. His tall, slender figure had an air 
of distinction, too authentic to be modern, and he moved as if he 
had a cape floating behind him in the wind. People explained him 
by saying that he had the vitality of a healthy animal, but they knew 
dimly that that was not correct. He had the vitality of a healthy 
human being, a thing so rare that no one could identity it He had 
the power of certainty. 

Nobody described his appearance as Latin, yet the word applied 
to him, not in its present, but in its original sense, not pertaining to 
Spain, but to ancient Rome. His body seemed designed as an exercise 
in consistency of style, a style made ot gauntness, of light flesh, of 
long legs and swift movements. His features had the line precision 
of sculpture, flis hair was black and straight, swept back. The suntan 
of his skin intensified the startling color of his eyes: they were a 
pure, clear blue. His face was open, its rapid changes of expression 
reflecting whatever he felt, as if he had nothing to hide. The blue 
eyes were still and changeless, never giving a hint of what he thought. 

He sat on the floor of his drawing room, dressed in sleeping paja- 
mas of thin black silk. The marbles spread on the carpet around him 
were made of the semi-precious stones of his native country: carne- 
lian and rock crystal. He did not rise when Dagny entered. He sal 
looking up at her, and a crystal marble fell like a teardrop out of 
his hand. He smiled, the unchanged, insolent, brilliant smile of his 
childhood. 

“Hi, Slug!” 

She heard herself answering, irresistibly, helplessly, happily: 

“Hi, Frisco!” 

She was looking at his face; it was the face she had knowfi. It bore 
no mark of the kind of life he had led, nor of what she hal seen on 
their last night together. There was no sign of tragedy, no bitterness, 
no tension — only the radiant mockery, matured and stressed, the 

114 



look of dangerously unpredictable amusement, and the great, guilt* 
less serenity of spirit* But this, she thought, was impossible; this was 
more shocking than all the rest* 

His eyes were studying her: the battered coat thrown open, half- 
slipping off her shoulders, and the slender body in a gray suit that 
looked like an office uniform. 

“If you came here dressed like this in order not to let me notice 
how lovely you are,” he said, “you miscalculated. You're lovely: i 
wish I could tell you what a relief it is to see a face that's intelligent 
though a woman’s. But you don’t want to hear it. That’s not what 
you came here for.” 

The words weie improper in so many ways, yet were said so tightly 
that they brought her back to reality, to anger and to the purpose 
of her visit. She remained standing, looking down at him, her face 
blank, refusing him any recognition of the personal, even of its power 
to offend her. She said, “I came here to ask you a question.” 

"Go ahead.” 

“When you told those reporters that you came to New York to 
witness the tarce, which farce did you mean?” 

He laughed aloud, like a man who seldom finds a chance to enjoy 
the unexpected. 

“That’s what I like about you. Dagny. There are seven million 
people in the city of New York, at present Out of seven million 
people, you are the only one to whom it could have occurred that I 
wasn’t talking about the Vail divorce scandal.” 

“What were you talking about?” 

“What alternative occurred to you?” 

“The San Sebastian disaster.” 

“That's much more amusing than the Vail divorce scandal, isn’t 
it.” 

She said in the solemn, merciless tone of a prosecutor. “You did 
it consciously, cold bloodedly and with full intention.” 

“Don’t you think it would be better if you took your coat off and 
sat down?” 

She knew she had made a mistake by betraying loo much intensity. 
She turned coldly, removed her coat and threw it aside. He did not 
rise to help her. She sat down in an armchair. He remained on the 
floor, at some distance, but it seemed as it he were sitting at her feet. 

“What was it 1 did with full intention?” he asked. 

“'1 lie entire San Sebastian swindle.” 

“What was my full intention?” 

“Thai is what I want to know,” 

He chuckled, as if she had asked him to explain in conversation 
a complex science requiring a lifetime of study. 

“You knew that the San Sebastian mines were worthless,” she 
said. “You knew it before you began the whole wretched business.” 

“Then why did I begin it?” 

“Don’t start telling me that you gained nothing. I know it. I know 
you lost fifteen million dollars of your own money. Yet it was done 
on purpose.” 

“Can you think of a motive that would prompt me to do it?” 

115 



“No. It’s inconceivable.” 

“Is it? You assume that I have a great mind, a great knowledge 
and a great productive ability, so that anything 1 undertake must 
necessarily be successful. And then you claim that I had no desire 
to put out my best effort for the People’s State of Mexico. Inconceiv- 
able, isn’t it?” 

“You knew, before you bought that property, that Mexico was in 
the hands of a looters' government. You didn't have to start a mining 
project for them.” 

“No, I didn't have to.'’ 

“You didn’t give a damn about that Mexican government, one 
way or another, because — ” 

“You’re wrong about that.” 

■* — because you knew they’d seize those mines sooner or later. 
What you were after is your American stock holders.” 

“That’s true ” He was looking straight at her, he was not smiling, 
his face was earnest. He added, “That's part of the truth.” 

“What’s the rest?” 

“U was not all I was after.” 

“What else?” 

“That’s for you to ligure out.” 

“I came here because 1 wanted you to know that I am beginning 
to understand your purpose ” 

He smiled. “If you did. you wouldn’t have come here ” 

“That’s true. I don’t understand and probably never shall. I am 
merely beginning to see part of it.” 

“Which part?” 

“You had exhausted every other form of depravity and sought a 
new thrill by swindling people like Jim and his friends, in order to 
watch them squirm. I don't know what sort of corruption could make 
anyone enjoy that, but that’s what you came to New York to see, 
at the right time.” 

“They certainly provided a spectacle of squirming on the giand 
scale. Your brother James In particular.” 

“They’re rotten fools, but in this case their only crime was that 
they trusted you. They trusted your name and your honor.” 

Again, she saw the look of earnestness and again knew with cer- 
tainty that it was genuine, when he said, “Yes. They did. 1 know it.” 

“And do you find it amusing?” 

“No. f don’t find it amusing at all.” 

He had continued playing with his marbles, absently, indifferently, 
taking a shot once in a while. She noticed suddenly the faultless 
accuracy of his aim, the skill of his hands. He merely flicked his wrist 
and sent a drop of stone shooting across the carpet to click sharply 
against another drop. She thought of his childhood and of tpe predic- 
tions that anything he did would be done superlatively. 

“No,” he said, “1 don’t find it amusing. Your brother lames and 
his friends knew nothing about the copper-mining industry. They 
knew nothing about making money. They did not think necessary 
to learn. They considered knowledge superfluous and judgment ines- 
sential. They observed that there 1 was in the world and t6at I made 

116 



it ray honor to know. They thought they could trust ray honor. One 
does not betray a trust of this kind, does one?” 

“Then you did betray it intentionally?” 

“That’s for you to decide, it was you who spoke about their trust 
and my honor. 1 don’t think in such terms any longer. . . He 
shrugged, adding, “I don’t give a damn about your brother James 
and his friends. Their theory was not new, it has worked for centu- 
ries. But it wasn’t foolproof. There is just one point that they over- 
looked. They thought it was s^fe to ride on my brain, because they 
assumed that the goal of my journey was wealth, AH their calcula- 
tions rested on the premise that I wanted to make money. What if 
i didn’t?” 

“If you didn't, what did you want?” 

“They never asked me that. Not to inquire about my aims, motives 
or desires is an essential part of their theory.” 

“If you didn’t want to make money, what possible motive could 
you have had?” 

“Any number of them. For instance, to spend it.” 

“To spend money on a certain, total failure?” 

“How was I to know that those mines were a certain, total 
failure?” 

“How could you help knowing it?” 

“Quite simply By giving it no thought.” 

“You started that project without giving it any thought?” 

“No, not exactly. But suppose I slipped up? I’m only human. I 
made a mistake. I failed. I made a bad job of it.” He flicked his 
wrist; a crystal marble shot, sparkling, across the floor and cracked 
violently against a brown one at the other end of the room. 

“I don’t believe it,” she said. 

“No? But haven’t I the right to be what is now accepted as 
human? Should I pay for everybody’s mistakes and never be permit- 
ted one of my own?” 

“That’s not like you.” 

“No?” He stretched himself full-length on the carpet, lazily, re- 
laxing. “Did you intend for me to notice that if you think I did it 
on purpose, then you still give me credit for having a purpose? 
You’re still unable to accept me as a bum?” 

She closed her eyes. She heard him laughing; it was the gayest 
sound in the world. She opened her eyes hastily; but there was no 
hint of cruelty in his face, only pure laughter. 

“My motive, Dagny? You don’t think that it’s the simplest one of 
all — the spur of the moment?” 

No, she thought, no, that’s not true; not if he laughed like that, 
not if he looked as he did. The capacity for unclouded enjoyment, 
she thought, does not belong to irresponsible fools; an inviolate 
peace of spirit is not the achievement of a drifter; to be able to laugh 
like that is the end result of the most profound, most solemn 
thinking. 

Almost dispassionately, looking at his figure stretched on the car- 
pet at her feet, she observed what memory it brought back to her: 
the black pajamas stressed the long lines of his body, the open collar 

117 



showed a smooth, young, sunburned skin— and she thought of the 
figure in black slacks and shirt stretched beside her on the grass at 
sunrise. She had felt pride then, the pride of knowing that she owned 
his body; she still felt it. She remembered suddenly, specifically, the 
excessive acts of their intimacy; the memory should have been offen- 
sive to her now, but wasn’t. It was still pride, without regret or hope, 
an emotion that had no power to reach her and that she had no 
power to destroy. 

Unaccountably, by an association of feeling that astonished her, 
she remembered what had conveyed to her recently the same sense 
of consummate joy as his. 

“Francisco," she heard ho sell saying softly, “we both loved the 
music of Richard Halley ..." 

“I still love it." 

"Have vou ever met him?" 

"Yes Why?'’ 

"Do you happen to know whether he has written a Fifth 
Concerto?" 

He remained perfectly still. She had thought him impervious to 
shock, he wasn't. But she could not attempt to guess why of all the 
things she had said, this should be the first to reach him. It was only 
an instant: then he asked evenlv. "What makes \ou think he has?" 

"Well, has he?" 

"You know that there are onlv foui Halley Concertos." 

"Yes. But l wondered whether he had written another one." 

"He has stopped writing." 

"I know." 

“Then what made you ask that?" 

"Just an idle thought. What is he doing now? Where is he?" 

"I don't know. 1 haven’t seen him for a long time. What made 
you think that there was a Fifth Concerto'*" 

"I didn't say there was 1 merely wondered about it." 

"Why did you think of Richard Halley just now‘ > " 

"Because" — she felt her control ciacking a little- "because my 
mind can’t make the leap from Richard Halley's music to , to 
Mrs. Gilbert Vail." 

He laughed, relieved "Oh, that? . . . Incidentally, il you’ve been 
following my publicity, have you noticed a funny little discrepancy 
in the story of Mrs. Gilbert Vail?" 

"1 don't read the stuff," 

"You should. She gave such a beautiful description of last New 
Year’s Eve, which we spent together in my villa in the Andes. The 
moonlight on the mountain peaks, and the blood-red flowers hanging 
on vines in the open windows. See anything wrong in tlje picture?" 

She said quietly, "It’s I who should ask you that, <|nd I m not 
going to." 

"Oh. I see nothing wrong — except that last New Yearfs Eve l was 
in El Paso, Texas, presiding at the opening of the San Sebastian Line 
of Taggart Transcontinental, as you should remember, even if you 
didn't choose to be present on the occasion. I had my picture taken 

118 



with my arms around your brother James and the Seflor Orrcn 
Boyle ” 

She gasped, remembering that this was true, remembering also 
that she had seen Mrs Vail's story in the newspapers 

“Francisco, what what does that mean?” 

He chuckled “Diaw your own conclusions Dagny” — his face 

was serious— “why did you think of Halley writing a Filth Concerto? 
Why not a new symphony or opera ? Why specifically a concerto 7 ” 

“Why does that disturb you 

“It doesn’t ” He added softly, “I still love his music, Dagny ” Hien 
he spoke lightly again “But it belonged to another age Our age 
provides a different kind of entertainment * 

He rolled over on his back and lay with his hands crossed under 
his head, looking up as if he were watching the scenes of a movie 
farce unrolling on the ceiling 

Dagny didn’t you enjoy the spectacle of the behavior of the 
People’s State of Mexico in regard to the San Sebastian Mines 7 
Did you read their government’s speeches and the editorials in their 
newspapers 0 1 hey are saymg that 1 am an unscrupulous cheat who 
has defrauded them f htv expected to have a successful mining con 
cern to sei/e I had no right to disappoint them like that Did you 
read about the scabby little bureaucrat who wanted them to sue 
me y 

He laughed, lying flat on his back his aims were thrown wide on 
the carpet forming a cross with his body, he seemed disarmed re- 
laxed and young 

‘ It was woith whatever it s cost me I could afford the price of 
that show It I had staged it intentionally 1 would have beaten the 
lecord of the Lmperor Nero What s burning a city — compared to 
tearing the lid off hell and letting men see it } * 

He raised himself, picked up a few marbles and sat shaking them 
absently m his hand, they clicked with the soft, clear sound of good 
stone She icali/ed suddenly that playing with those marbles was not 
a deliberate affectation on his part it was icstlessness he could not 
remain inactive for long 

’The government of the Peoples State of Mexico has issued a 
proclamation ’ he said ‘asking the people to be patient and put up 
with hardships just a little longer It seems that the copper fortune 
of the San Sebastian Mines was part of the plans of the central 
planning council It was to raise everybody's standard of living and 
provide a roast of pork every Sunday for every man. woman, child 
and abortion in the People’s State of Mexico Now the planners are 
asking then people not to blame the government but to blame the 
depravity of the rich, because l turned out to be an irresponsible 
playboy, instead of the greedy capitalist 1 was expected to be How 
were they to know, they’re asking, that 1 would let them down 7 
Well, true enough How were they to know it>’ 

She noticed the way he fingered the marbles in his hand He was 
not conscious of it, he was looking off into some grim distance, but 
she felt certain that the action was a relief to him. perhaps as a 
contrast His fingers were moving slowly, feeling the texture of the 

119 



stones with sensual enjoyment. Instead of finding it crude, she found 
*t strangely attractive — as if, she thought suddenly, as if sensuality 
were not physical at all, but came from a fine discrimination of the 
spirit. 

“And that’s not all they didn’t know,” he said. “They’re in for 
some more knowledge. There’s that housing settlement for the work- 
ers of San Sebastian. It cost eight million dollars. Steel-frame houses, 
with plumbing, electricity and refrigeration. Also a school, a church, 
a hospital and a movie theater. A settlement built for people who 
had lived in hovels made of driftwood and stray tin cans. My reward 
for building it was to be the privilege of escaping with my skm, a 
special concession due to the accident of my not being a native of 
the People’s State of Mexico. That workers’ settlement was also part 
of their plans. A model example of progressive State Housing. Well, 
those steel-frame houses are mainly cardboard, with a coating of 
good imitation shellac. They won’t stand another year. The plumbing 
pipes — as well as most of our mining equipment — were purchased 
from dealers whose main source of supply are the city dumps of 
Buenos Aires and Rio de Janeiro. I’d give those pipes another five 
months, and the electric system about six. The wonderful roads we 
graded up four thousand feet of rock for the People's Slate of Mex- 
ico. will not last beyond a couple of winters: they’re cheap cement 
without foundation, and the bracing at the bad turns is just painted 
clapboard Wait for one good mountain slide The church. I think, 
will stand. They’ll need it.” 

“Francisco.” she whispered, “did you do it on purpose?” 

He raised his head; she was startled to see that his face had a look 
of infinite weariness. “Whether I did it on purpose,” he said, “or 
through neglect, or through stupidity, don’t you understand that that 
doesn’t make any difference? The same element was missing.” 

She was trembling. Against all her decisions and control, she cried, 
“Francisco! If you see what's happening in the world, if you under- 
stand all the things you said, you can't laugh about it! You. of all 
men, you should fight them!” 

“Whom?” 

“The looters, and those who make world-looting possible. The 
Mexican planners and their kind.” 

His smile had a dangerous edge. “No, my dear. It’s you that 1 
have to fight.” 

She looked at him blankly. ‘What are you trying to say?” 

“I am saying that the workers’ settlement of San Sebastian cost 
eight million dollars.” he answered with slow emphasis, his voice 
hard. “The price paid for those cardboard houses was the price that 
could have bought steel structures. So was the price paid for every 
other item. That money went to men who grow rich by such methods. 
Such men do not remain rich for long. The money will g<j into chan- 
nels which will carry it, not to the most productive, but jo the most 
corrupt. By the standards of our time, the man who has the least to 
offer is the man who wins. That money will vanish in pfojects such 
as the San Sebastian Mines.” 

She asked with effort, “Is that what you’re after?” 

120 



“Yes.” 

‘is that what you find amusing?” 

“Yes” 

“I am thinking of your name,” she said, while another part of her 
mind was crying to her that reproaches were useless. “It was a tradi- 
tion of your family that a d’Anconia always left a fortune greater 
than the one he received.” 

“Oh yes, my ancestors had a remarkable abitity for doing the right 
thing at the right time — and for making the right investments. Of 
course, ‘investment* is a relative term. It depends on what you wish 
to accomplish. For instance, look at San Sebastian. It cost me fifteen 
million dollars, but these fifteen million wiped out forty million be- 
longing to Taggart Transcontinental, thirty-five million belonging to 
stockholders such as James Taggart and Orren Boyle, and hundreds 
of millions which will be lost in secondary consequences. That's not 
a bad return on an investment, is it, Dagny?” 

She was sitting straight. “Do you realize what you’re saying?” 

“Oh, fully! Shall I beat you to it and name the consequences you 
were going to reproach me for? First, 1 don’t think that Taggart 
Transcontinental will recover from its loss on that preposterous San 
Sebastian Line, You think it will, but it won’t. Second, the San Sebas- 
tian helped your brother, James, to destroy the Phoenix-Durango, 
which was about the only good railroad left anywhere.” 

“You realize all that?” 

“And a great deal more.’* 

“Do you” — she did not know why she had to say it, except that 
the memory of the face with the dark, violent eyes seemed to stare 
at her — “do you know Ellis Wyatt?” 

“Suie.** 

“Do you know what this might do to him?” 

“Yes. He’s the one who’s going to be wiped out next.” 

“Do you . . . find that , . . amusing?” 

“Much more amusing than the ruin of the Mexican planners.” 

She stood up. She had called him corrupt for years; she had feared 
it, she had thought about it, she had tried to forget it and never 
think of it again; but she had never suspected how far the corruption 
had gone. 

She was not looking at him; she did not know that she was saying 
it aloud, quoting his words of the past: ”... who’ll do greater honor, 
you — to Nat Taggart, or I — to Sebastian d’Anconia ...” 

“But didn't you realize that 1 named those mines in honor of my 
great ancestor? I think it was a tribute which he would have liked,” 

It took her a moment to recover her eyesight; she had never 
known what was meant by blasphemy or what one felt on encoun- 
tering it; she knew it now. 

He had risen and stood courteously, smiling down at her; it was 
a cold smile, impersonal and unrevealing, 

vShe was trembling, but it did not matter. She did not care what 
he saw or guessed or laughed at. 

“I came here because I wanted to know the reason for what you’ve 
done with your life,” she said tonelessly, without anger. 

121 



* *i have told you the reason,” he answered gravely; “but you don’t 
want to believe it.” 

*i kept seeing you as you were. I couldn’t forget it. And that 
you should have become what you are — that does not belong in a 
rational universe.” 

“No? And the world as you see it around you does?” 

'‘You were not the kind of man who gets broken by any kind 
of world ” 

“True.” 

“Then— why?” 

He shrugged. “Who is John Galt?” 

“Oh. don’t use gutter language!” 

He glanced at her. His lips held the hint of a smile, but his eyes 
were still, earnest and, for an instant, distuibingly perceptive. 

“Why?” she repeated. 

He answered, as he had answered in the night, in this hotel, ten 
years ago, “You’re not ready to hear it ” 

He did not follow her to the door She had put her hand on the 
doorknob when she lumed — and stopped He stood across the room, 
looking at her; it was a glance directed at her whole person; she 
knew its meaning and it held her motionless. 

“I still want to sleep with you,” he said. “But I am not a man 
who is happy enough to do it ” 

“Not happy enough?” she repeated m complete bewilderment. 

He laughed. “Is it proper that that should be the first thing you’d 
answer?” He waited, but she remained silent. ‘ You want it, too, 
don’t you'*” 

She was about to answer “No,” but realized that the truth was 
worse than that “Yes,” she answered coldly, “but it doesn’t matter 
to me that I want it.” 

He smiled, in open appreciation, acknowledging the strength she 
had needed to say it 

But he was not smiling when he said, as she opened the door to 
leave, “Yod have a great deal of courage, Dagny. Some day. you’ll 
have enough of it.” 

“Of what? Courage 9 ” 

But he did not answer 


Chapter V! THE NONCOMMERCIAL 

Rearden pressed his forehead to the mirror and tried not to think. 

That was the only way he could go through with it, he told himself. 
He concentrated on the relief ot the mirror’s cooling touch, wonder- 
ing how one went about forcing one’s mind into blankness, particu- 
larly after a lifetime lived on the axiom that the constant clearest, 
most ruthless function of his rational faculty was his forefenost duty. 
He wondered why no effort had ever seemed beyond his capacity, 
yet now he could not scrape up the strength to stick a* few black 
pearl studs into his starched white shirt front. 

This was his wedding anniversary and he had knowiji for three 

122 



months that the party would take place tonight, as Lillian wished. 
He had promised it to her, safe in the knowledge that the party was 
a long way off and that he would attend to it, when the time came, 
as he attended to every duty on his overloaded schedule. Then, dur- 
ing three months of eighteen-hour workdays, he had forgotten it 
happily — until half an hour ago, when, long past dinner time, his 
secretary had entered his office and said firmly, “Your party, Mr, 
Rearden.” He had cried, “Good God!” leaping to his feet; he had 
hurried home, rushed up the stairs, started tearing his clothes off 
and gone through the routine of dressing, conscious only of the need 
to hurry, not of the purpose. When the full realization of the purpose 
struck him like a sudden blow, he stopped. 

“You don't care for anything but business. 1 ' He had heard it all 
his life, pronounced as a verdict of damnation. He had always known 
that business was regarded as some sort of secret, shameful cult, 
which one did not impose on innocent laymen, that people thought 
of it as of an ugly necessity, to be performed but never mentioned, 
that to talk shop was an offense against higher sensibilities, that just 
as one washed machine grease off one's hands before coming home, 
so one was supposed to wash the stain of business off one’s mind 
before entering a drawing ioom He had never held that creed, but 
he had accepted it as natural that his family should hold it. He took 
it for granted— wordlessly, in the manner of a feeling absorbed in 
childhood, left unquestioned and unnamed — that he had dedicated 
himself, like the maityr of some dark religion, to the service of a 
faith which was his passionate love, but which made him an outcast 
among men, whoso sympathy he was not to expect. 

He had accepted the tenet that it was his duty to give his wife 
some form of existence unrelated to business. But he had never 
found the capacity to do it or even to experience a sense ot guilt. 
He could neither force himself to change nor blame her if she chose 
to condemn him. 

He had given Lillian none of his time foi months — no, he thought, 
for years; for the eight years of their marriage. He had no interest 
to spare for her interests, not even enough to learn just what they 
were. She had a large circle ot friends, and he had heard it said that 
their names repiesented the heart of the country's culture, but he 
had never had time to meet them or even to acknowledge their fame 
by knowing what achievements had earned it. He knew only that he 
often saw their names on the magazine covers on newsstands. If 
Lillian resented his attitude, he thought, she was right. If her manner 
toward him was objectionable, he deserved it. If his family called 
hirn heartless, it was true. 

He bad never spared himself in any issue. When a problem came 
up at the mills, his first concern was to discover what error he had 
made; he did not search for anyone's fault but his own; it was of 
himself that he demanded perfection. He would grant himself no 
mercy now; he took the blame. But at the mills, it prompted him to 
action in an immediate impulse to correct the error; now, it had no 
effect. ... Just a few more minutes, he thought, standing against the 
mirror, his eyes closed. 


123 



He couki not stop the thing in his mind that went on throwing 
words at him; it was like trying to plug a broken hydrant with his 
bare hands. Stinging jets, part words, part pictures, kept shooting at 
his brain. . . . Hours of it, he thought, hours to spend watching the 
eyes of the guests getting heavy with boredom if they were sober or 
glassing into an imbecile stare if they weren’t, and pretend that he 
noticed neither, and strain to think of something to say to them, 
when he had nothing to say — while he needed hours of inquiry to 
find a successor for the superintendent of his rolling mills who had 
resigned suddenly, without explanation — he had to do it at once — 
men of that sort were so hard to find— and if anything happened to 
break the flow of the rolling mills — it was the Taggart rail that was 
being rolled. ... He remembered the silent reproach^ the look of 
accusation, long-bearing patience and scorn, which he always saw in 
the eyes of his family when they caught some evidence of his passion 
for his business — and the futility of his silence, of his hope that they 
would not think Rearden Steel meant as much to him as it did — 
like a drunkard pretending indifference to liquor, among people who 
watch him with the scornful amusement of their full knowledge of 
his shameful weakness. . . . “1 heard you last night coming home at 
two in the morning, where were you?” his mother saying to him at 
the dinner table, and Lillian answering, “Why, at the mills, of 
course.” as another wife would say, “At the corner saloon.” ... Or 
Lillian asking him, the hint of a wise half-smile on her face, “What 
were you doing in New York yesterday?” “It was a banquet with the 
boys.” “Business?” “Yes,” “O/ course ” — and Lillian turning away, 
nothing more, except the shameful realization that he had almost 
hoped she would think he had attended some sort of obscene stag 
party. . . . An ore carrier had gone down in a storm on Lake Michi- 
gan, with thousands of tons of Rearden ore— those boats were falling 
apart — if he didn’t take it upon himself to help them obtain the 
replacements they needed, the owners of the line would go bankrupt, 
and there ya$ no other line left in operation on Lake Michigan. . . . 
“That nook?” said Lillian, pointing to an arrangement of settees and 
coffee tables in their drawing room. “Why, no, Henry, it’s not new, 
but I suppose I should feel flattered that three weeks is all it took 
you to notice it. It’s my own adaptation of the morning room of a 
famous French palace — but things like that can’t possibly interest 
you, darting, there’s no stock market quotation on them, none what- 
ever,” . . . The order for copper, which he had placed six months 
ago, had not been delivered, the promised date had been postponed 
three times — “We can’t help it, Mr. Rearden” —he had to find an- 
other company to deal with, the supply of copper was becoming 
increasingly uncertain. . , , Philip did not smile, when he! looked up 
in the midst of a speech he was making to some friend of their 
mother’s, about some organization he had joined, but| there was 
something that suggested a smite of superiority in the lodse muscles 
of his face when he said, “No, you wouldn’t care for tiis, it’s not 
business, Henry, not business at all, it’s a strictly noncommercial 
endeavor.” . . . That contractor in Detroit, with the job ot rebuilding 
a large factory, was considering structural shapes of Rearden Metal — 

124 



he should fly to Detroit and speak to him in person — he should have 
done it a week ago — he could have done it tonight, . . . “You’re hot 
listening/’ said his mother at the breakfast table, when his mind 
wandered to the current coal price index, while she was telling him 
about the dream she’d had last night. “You’ve never listened to a 
living soul. You’re not interested in anything but yourself. You don’t 
give a damn about people, not about a single human creature on 
God’s earth.” . . .The typed pages lying on the desk in his office 
were a report on the tests of an airplane motor made of Reardon 
Metal—perhaps of all things on earth, the one he wanted most at 
this moment was to read it — it had lain on his desk, untouched, for 
three days, he had had no time for it — why didn’t he do it now and — 

He shook his head violently, opening his eyes, stepping back from 
the mirror. 

He tried to reach for the shirt studs. He saw his hand reaching, 
instead, for the pile of mail on his dresser. It was mail picked as 
urgent, it had to be read tonight, but he had had no time to read it 
in the office. His secretary had stuffed it into his pocket cm his way 
out He had thrown it there while undressing. 

A newspaper clipping fluttered down to the floor. It was an edito- 
rial which his secretary had marked with an angry slash in red pencil. 
It was entitled “Equalization of Opportunity.' ” He had to read it: 
there had been too much talk about this issue in the Iasi three 
months, ominously too much. 

He read it, with the sound of voices and forced laughter coming 
from downstairs, reminding him that the guests were arriving, that 
the parly had started and that he would face the bitter, reproachful 
glances of his family when he came down. 

The editorial said that at a time of dwindling production, shrinking 
markets and vanishing opportunities to make a living, it was unfair 
to let one man hoard several business enterprises, while others had 
none; it was destructive to let a few corner all the resources, leaving 
others no chance; competition was essential to society, and it was 
society’s duty to see that no competitor ever rose beyond the range 
of anybody who wanted to compete with him. The editorial predicted 
the passage of a bill which had been proposed, a bill forbidding any 
person or corporation to own more than one business concern. 

Wesley Mouch, his Washington man, had told Rearden not to 
worry; the fight would be stiff, he had said, but the bill would be 
defeated. Rearden understood nothing about that kind of fight. He 
left it to Mouch and his staff. He could barely find time to skim 
through their reports from Washington and to sign the checks which 
Mouch requested for the battle. 

Rearden did not believe that the bill would pass. He was incapable 
of believing it. Having dealt with the dean reality of metals, technol- 
ogy, production all his life, he had acquired the conviction that one 
had to concern oneself with the rational, not the insane — that one 
had to seek that which was right, because the right answer always 
won — that the senseless, the wrong* the monstrously unjust could not 
work, could not succeed, could do nothing but defeat itself. A battle 
against a thing such as that bill seemed preposterous and faintly 

125 



embarrassing to him, as if he were suddenly asked to compete with 
a man who calculated steel mixtures by the formulas of numerology. 

He had told himself that the issue was dangerous. But the loudest 
.screaming of the most hysterical editorial roused no emotion in 
him — while a variation of a decimal point in a laboratory report on 
a test of Rearden Metal made him leap to his feet tn eagerness or 
apprehension. He had no energy to spare tor anything else. 

He crumpled the editorial and threw it into the wastebasket. He 
felt the leaden approach of that exhaustion which he never felt at 
his job, the exhaustion that seemed to wait for him and catch him 
the moment he turned to other concerns. He felt as if he were inca- 
pable of any desire except a desperate longing tor sleep 

He told himself that he had to attend the party— that his family 
had the right to demand it of him — that he had to learn to hke their 
kind of pleasure, for their sake, not his own. 

He wondered why this was a motive that had no power to impel 
him. Throughout his life, whenever he became convinced that a 
course of action was right, the desire to follow it had come automati- 
cally. What was happening to him? — he wondered The impossible 
conflict of feeling reluctance to do that which was right— wasn't it 
the basic formula of moral coiruption? To recognize one’s guilt, yet 
feel nothing but the coldest, most profound indifference— wasn't it 
a betrayal of that which had been the motor of his life-course and 
of his pride? 

He gave himself no time to seek an answer. He finished dressing, 
quickly, pitilessly. 

Holding himself erect, his tall figure moving with the unstressed, 
unhurried confidence of habitual authority, the white of a fine hand- 
kerchief in the breast pocket of his black dinner jacket, he walked 
slowly down the stairs to the drawing room, looking— to the satisfac- 
tion ol the dowagers who watched him -like the perfect figure of a 
great industrialist. 

He saw BiUtan at the foot of the stairs. The patrician lines of a 
lemon-yellow Empire evening gown stressed her graceful body, and 
she stood like a person proudly in control of her proper background. 
He smiled; he liked to see her happy; it gave some reasonable justifi- 
cation to the party. 

He approached her — and stopped. She had always shown good 
taste in her use of jewelry, never wearing too much of if. But tonight 
she wore an ostentatious display a diamond necklace, earrings, rings 
and brooches. Her arms looked conspicuously bare by contrast. On 
her right wrist, as sole ornament, she wore the bracelet of Rearden 
Metal. The glittering gems made it look like an ugly picc$ of dime- 
store jewelry. 

When he moved his glance from her wrist to her face| he found 
her looking at him. Her eyes were narrowed and he could Jiot define 
their expression; it was a look that seemed both veiled an$ purpose- 
ful the look of something hidden that flaunted its security from 
detection. 

He wanted to tear the bracelet off her wrist. Instead, in Obedience 

126 



to her voice gaily pronouncing an introduction, he bowed to the 
dowager who stood beside her, his face expressionless. 

“Man? What is man? He’s just a collection of chemicals with delu- 
sions of grandeur,” said Dr. Pritchett to a group of guests across 
the room. 

Dr. Pritchett picked a canape off a crystal dish, held it speared 
between two straight fingers and deposited it whole into his mouth. 

“Man’s metaphysical pretensions,” he said, “are preposterous. A 
miserable bit of protoplasm, full of ugly little concepts and mean 
little emotions — and it imagines itself important! Really, you know, 
that is the root of all the troubles in the world.” 

“But which concepts are not ugly or mean, Professor?” asked an 
earnest matron whose husband owned an automobile factory. 

“None,” said Dr. Pritchett. “None within the range of man’s 
capacity.” 

A young man asked hesitantly, “But it we haven’t any good con- 
cepts, how do we know that the ones we’ve got are ugly? 1 mean, 
by what standard?” 

“There aren’t any standards.” 

This silenced his audience. 

“The philosophers of the past were superficial,” Dr. Pritchett went 
on. “It remained for our century to redefine the purpose of philoso- 
phy. The purpose of philosophy is not to help men find the meaning 
of life, but to prove to them that there isn’t arty.” 

An attractive young woman, whose father owned a coal mine, 
asked indignantly, “Who can tell us that?” 

“1 am trying to.” said Dr. Pritchett. For the last three years, he 
had been head of the Department of Philosophy at the Patrick 
Henry University. 

Lillian Reardon approached, her jewels glittering under the lights. 
The expression on her face was held to the soft hint ol‘ a smile, set 
and faintly suggested, like the waves of her hair. 

“It is this insistence of man upon meaning that makes him so 
difficult,” said Dr. Pritchett. “Once he realizes that he is of no impor- 
tance whatever in the vast scheme of the universe, that no possible 
significance can be attached to his activities, that it does not matter 
whether he lives or dies, he will become much more . . . tractable.” 

He shrugged and reached for another canape. A businessman said 
uneasily, “What I asked you about. Professor, was what you thought 
about the Equalization of Opportunity Bill.” 

“Oh, that?” said Dr. Pritchett, “But I believe 1 made it dear that 
I am in favor of it, because I am in favor of a free economy. A free 
economy cannot exist without competition. Therefore, men must be 
forced to compete. Therefore, we must control men in order to force 
them to be free.” 

“But, look . . . isn’t that sort of a contradiction?” 

“Not in the higher philosophical sense. You must learn to see 
beyond the static definitions of old-fashioned thinking. Nothing is 
static in the universe. Everything is fluid.” 

“But it stands to reason that if—” 

127 



“Reason, my dear fellow, is the most nalfve of all superstitions. 
That, at least, has been generally conceded in our age." 

“But I don’t quite understand how we can — ” 

“You suffer from the popular delusion of believing that things can 
be understood. You do not grasp the fact that the universe is a 
solid contradiction.'’ 

“A contradiction of what?" asked the matron. 

“Of itself?' 

“How . . . how’s that?” 

“My dear madam, the duty of thinkers is not to explain, but to 
demonstrate that nothing can be explained.” 

“Yes, of course . . . only . . 

“The purpose of philosophy is not to seek knowledge, but to prove 
that knowledge is impossible to man.” 

“But when we prove it,” asked the young woman, “what’s going 
to be left?” 

“Instinct” said Dr, Pritchett reverently 

At the other end of the room, a group was listening to Balph 
Eubank. He sat upright on the edge of an armchair, in order to 
counteract the appearance of his face arid figure, which had a ten- 
dency to spread if relaxed. 

“The literature of the past.” said Balph Eubank, “was a shallow 
fraud. It whitewashed life in order to please the money tycoons 
whom it served. Morality, free will, achievement, happy endings, and 
man as some sort of heroic being — all that stuff is laughable to us. 
Our age has given depth to literature for the first time, by exposing 
the real essence of life.” 

A very young girl in a white evening gown asked timidly, “What 
is the real essence of life, Mr. Eubank?” 

“Suffering,” said Balph Eubank. “Defeat and sulfering.” 

“But ... but why? People are happy . . . sometimes . . . aren’t 
they?” 

“That is a delusion of those whose emotions are superficial.” 

The girl blushed. A wealthy woman who had inherited an oil re- 
finery, asked guiltily, “What should we do to raise the people's liter- 
ary taste, Mr. Eubank 9 ” 

“That is a great social problem,” said Balph Eubank. He was 
described as the literary leader of the age, but had never written a 
book that sold more than three thousand copies. “Personally, 1 be- 
lieve that an Equalization of Opportunity Bill applying to literature 
would be the solution.” 

“Oh, do you approve of that Bill for industry? I’m not sure 1 
know what to think of it.” 

“Certainly, I approve of it. Our culture has sunk intri a bog of 
materialism. Men have lost all spiritual values in theiif pursuit of 
material production and technological trickery. They're tfao comfort- 
able. They will return to a nobler life if we teach th|m to bear 
privations. So we ought to place a limit upon their matepal greed.” 

“I hadn't thought of it that way,” said the woman apologetically. 

“But how are you going to work an Equalization of Opportunity 

128 



Bill for literature, Ralph?” asked Mort Uddy. “That's a new one 
on me.” 

“My name is Ralph,” said Eubank angrily. “And it’s a new one 
on you because it’s my own idea.” 

“Okay, okay. I’m not quarreling, am 1? I’m just asking.” Mort 
Liddy smiled. He spent most of his time smiling nervously. He was 
a composer who wrote old-fashioned scores for motion pictures, and 
modern symphonies for sparse audiences. 

“It would work very simply,” said Balph Eubank. “There should 
be a law limiting the sale of any book to ten thousand copies. This 
would throw the literary market open to new talent, fresh ideas and 
non-commercial writing. If people were forbidden to buy a million 
copies of the same piece of trash, they would be forced to buy bet- 
ter books.” 

“You’ve got something there,” said Mort Liddy. “But wouldn’t it 
be kinda tough on the writers' bank accounts?” 

“So much the better. Only those whose motive is not moneymak- 
ing should be allowed to write.” 

“But, Mr. Eubank,” asked the young girl in the white dress, “what 
if more than ten thousand people want to buy a certain book?” 

‘Ten thousand readers is enough for any hook.” 

‘That’s not what I mean. 1 mean, what if they want it?” 

“That is irrelevant.” 

“But if a book has a good story which—” 

“Plot is a primitive vulgarity in literature,” said Balph Eubank 
contemptuously. 

Dr. Pritchett, on his way across the room to the bar, stopped to 
say, “Quite so. Just as logic is a primitive vulgarity in philosophy.” 

“Just as melody is a primitive vulgarity in music,” said Mort Liddy. 

“What’s all this noise?” asked Lillian Rcarden, glittering to a stop 
beside them. 

“Lillian, my angel.” Balph Eubank drawled, “did 1 tell you that 
Pm dedicating my new novel to you?” 

“Why, thank you, darling.” 

“What is the name of your new novel?” asked the wealthy woman. 

"'The Heart Is a Milkman 

“What is it about?” 

“Frustration.” 

“But, Mr. Eubank,” asked the young girl in the white dress, blush- 
ing desperately, “if everything is frustration, what is there to live 
for?” 

“Brother-love,” said Balph Eubank grimly. 

Bertram Scudder stood slouched against the bar. His long, thin 
face looked as if it had shrunk inward, with the exception of his 
mouth and eyeballs, which were left to protrude as three soft globes. 
He was the editor of a magazine called The Future and he had 
written an article on Hank Rearden, entitled “The Octopus.” 

. Bertram Scudder picked up his empty glass and shoved it silently 
toward the bartender, to be refilled. He took a gulp from his fresh 
drink, noticed the empty glass in front of Philip Rearden, who stood 
beside him, and jerked his thumb in a silent command to the bar- 

129 



tender He ignored the empty glass m front of Betty Pope, who stood 
at Philips other side 

“Look, bud/’ said Bertram Scudder, his eyeballs focused approxi- 
mately in the direction of Philip “whethtr you like it or not, the 
Equalization of Opportunity Bill represents a great step forward ’ 

‘ What made you think that 1 did not like it Mr Scudder* Philip 
asked humbly 

Well its going to pinch isn t it M he long arm of society is going 
to trim a little off the hors d’oeuvres bill around here ' He waved 
his hand at the bar 

“Why do you assume that 1 object to that * * 

“You don’t* Bertram Scudder asked without curiosity 
“I don t* * said Philip hotly I have always placed the public good 
above any personal consideration I have contributed my time and 
money to Fucnds of Globa! Progiess in their crusade for the Equal 
nation ot Opportunity Bill I think n is ptrfcctly unfair that one man 
should get all the breaks and leave none to others 
Bertram Scudder considered him speeulatwcly but without partic 
ular interest Well that s quite unusually nice of you he said 
4 Some people do take moral issues seriously Mr Scudder said 
Philip with a gentle stress of pride in his voice 

‘What s he talking about Philip* asked Betty Pope Wc don t 
know anybody who owns more than one business do wc * 

Oh, pipe down' said Bertram ScuddeT his voice bored 
“1 don t see why there’s so much tuss about that E*qu dilation ot 
Opportunity Bill said Betty Pope aggitssivUy in the lone of an 
expert on economics I don t see why businessmen objcit to it It s 
to their own advantage If everybody else is poor they won l havt 
any market tor their goods But if they stop bung stlhsh and shall 
the goods they’ve hoarded — they II have a chance to work hard and 
produce some more 

“I do not see why industrialists should be considcied at all said 
Scudder When the masses are destitute and yet there are goods 
available It s idiotic to expect people to Lx stopped by some scrap 
ot paper called a property deed Property lights are a supustition 
One holds propci ty only by the courtesy of those who do not seize 
it The ptople ean seize it at any moment It they can why shouldn t 
they* 

“They should ’ said C laude Slagenhop They need it Need is the 
only consideration If people are in need we’ve got to seize things 
first and talk about it afterwards ’ 

Claude Slagenhop had approached and managed to squeeze him 
self between Philip and Scudder, shoving Scudder aside impercepti 
bly Slagenhop was not tall or heavy, but he had a squflie eompaet 
bulk and a broken nose He was the president of Pnends of Global 
Progress 

“Hunger won t wait, said ( laude Slagenhop Ideasiare just hot 
air An empty belly is a solid tact I’ve said in all my speeches that 
it’s not necessary to talk too much Society is suffering for lack ot 
business opportunities at the moment, so we’ve got the fight to seize 
such opportunities as exist Right is whatever’s good fair society ” 

130 



“He didn’t dig that ore single-handed, did he?” cried Philip sud- 
denly, his voice shrill. “He had to employ hundreds of workers. They 
did it. Why does he think he’s so good?” 

The two men looked at him, Scudder lifting an eyebrow, Slagen- 
hop without expression. 

“Oh, dear me!” said Betty Pope, remembering. 

Hank Reardon stood at a window in a dim recess at the end of 
the drawing room. He hoped no one would notice him for a few 
minutes. He had just escaped from a middle-aged woman who had 
been telling him about her psychic experiences. He stood, looking 
out. Far in the distance, the red glow of Reardon Steel moved in 
the sky. He watched it for a moment’s relief. 

He turned to look at the drawing room. He had never liked his 
house; it had been Lillian’s choice. But tonight, the shifting colors 
of the evening dresses drowned out the appearance of the room and 
gave it an air of brilliant gaiety. He liked to see people being gay, 
even though he did not understand this particular manner of 
enjoyment. 

He looked at the flowers, at the sparks of light on the crystal 
glasses, at the naked arms and shoulders of women. There was a 
cold wind outside, sweeping empty stretches of land. He saw the thin 
branches of a tree being twisted, like arms waving in an appeal for 
help. 'Hie tree stood against the glow of the mills. 

1 le could not name his sudden emotion. He had no words to state 
its cause, its quality, its meaning. Some part ot it was joy, but it was 
solemn like the act of baring one’s head — he did not know to whom. 

When he stepped hack into the crowd, he was smiling. But the 
smile vanished abruptly; he saw' the entrance of a rtew guest; it was 
Dagny Taggart. 

Lillian moved forward to meet her, studying her with curiosity. They 
had met before, on infrequent occasions, and she found it strange to 
see Dagny Taggart wearing an evening gown. It was a black dress 
with a bodice that fell as a cape over one arm and shoulder, leaving 
the other bare; the naked shoulder was the gown's only ornament. 
Seeing her in the suits she wore, one never thought of Dagny Tag- 
gart's body. The black dress seemed excessively revealing — because 
it was astonishing to discover that the lines of her shoulder were 
fragile and beautiful, and that the diamond band on the wrist of her 
naked arm gave her the most feminine of all aspects: the look of 
being chained. 

“Miss Taggart, it is such a wonderful surprise to see you here,” 
said Lillian Rearden. the muscles of her face performing the motions 
of a smile, “I had not really dared to hope that an invitation from 
me would take you away from your ever so much weightier concerns. 
Do permit me to feel flattered.” 

James Taggart had entered with his sistet. Lillian smiled at him, in 
the manner of a hasty postscript, as if noticing him for the first time. 

“Hello, James. That’s your penalty for being popular — one tends 
to lose sight of you in the surprise of seeing your sister,” 

“No one can match you in popularity, Lillian,” he answered, smil- 
ing thinly, “nor ever lose sight of you.” 

131 



“Me? Oh, but I am quite resigned to taking second place in the 
shadow of my husband. I am humbly aware that the wife of a great 
man has to be contented with reflected glory-— don't you think so, 
Miss Taggart?” 

“No/’ said Dagny, “1 don’t.” 

“Is this a compliment or a reproach. Miss Taggart? But do forgive 
me if I confess Fm helpless. Whom may I present to you? Fm afraid 
I have nothing but writers and artists to otter, and they wouldn’t 
interest you, Fm sure.” 

“Fd like to find Hank and say hello to him,” 

“But of course. James, do you remember you said you wanted to 
meet Balph Eubank? — oh yes, he’s here — Fll tell him that I heard 
you rave about his last novel at Mrs. Whitcomb’s dinner!” 

Walking across the room, Dagny wondered why she had said that 
she wanted to find Hank Rearden, what had prevented her from 
admitting that she had seen him the moment she entered. 

Rearden stood at the other end of the long room, looking at her. 
He watched her as she approached, but he did not step forward to 
meet her. 

“Hello, Hank.” 

“Good evening.” 

He bowed, courteously, impersonally, the movement ot his body 
matching the distinguished formality of his clothes. He did not smile. 

“Thank you for inviting me tonight.” she said gaily. 

“I cannot claim that I knew you were coming.” 

“Oh? Then I’m glad that Mrs. Rearden thought of me. I wanted 
to make an exception.” 

“An exception?” 

“1 don’t go to parties very often.” 

“I am pleased that you chose this occasion as the exception.” He 
did not add “Miss Taggart,” but it sounded as if he had. 

The formality of his manner was so unexpected that she was un- 
able to adjust to it. “I wanted to celebrate,” she said. 

“To celebrate my wedding anniversary?” 

“Oh, is it your wedding anniversary? I didn’t know. My congratu- 
lations. Hank,” 

“What did you wish to celebrate?” 

“I thought Fd permit myself a rest. A celebration of my own — in 
your honor and mine.” 

“For what reason?” 

Sbe was thinking of the new track on the rocky grades of the 
Colorado mountains, growing slowly toward the distant goal of the 
Wyatt oil fields. She was seeing the greenish-blue glow of the rails 
on the frozen ground, among the dried weeds, the naked' boulders, 
the rotting shanties of half-starved settlements. 

“In honor of the first sixty miles of Rearden Metal t£ack,” she 
answered. 

“I appreciate it.” The tone of his voice was the one fiat would 
have been proper if he had said, “I’ve never heard of it.? 

She found nothing else to say. She felt as if she were speaking to 
a stranger. 


132 



“Why, Miss Taggart!” a cheerful voice broke their silence. “Now 
this is what I mean when l say that Hank Rearden can achieve 
any miracle!” 

A businessman whom they knew had approached, smiling at her in 
delighted astonishment. The three of them had often held emergency 
conferences about freight rates and steel deliveries. Now he looked 
at her, his face an open comment on the change in her appearance, 
the change, she thought, which Rearden had not noticed. 

She laughed, answering the man’s greeting, giving herself no time 
to recognize the unexpected stab of disappointment, the unadmitted 
thought that she wished she had seen this look on Rearden’s face, 
instead. She exchanged a few sentences with the roan. When she 
glanced around, Rearden was gone. 

“So that is >our famous sister?” said Balph Eubank to James 
Taggart, looking at Dagny across the room. 

“I was not aware that my sister was famous,” said Taggart, a faint 
bite in his voice. 

“But, my good man, she’s an unusual phenomenon in the held of 
economics, so you must expect people to talk about her. Your sister 
is a symptom of the illness of our century. A decadent product of 
the machine age. Machines have destroyed man’s humanity, taken 
him away from the soil, robbed him of his natural arts, killed his 
soul and turned him into an insensitive robot. There’s an example 
of it — a woman who runs a railroad, instead of practicing the beauti- 
ful craft of the handloom and bearing children.” 

Rearden moved among the guests, trying not to be trapped into 
conversation He looked at the room; he saw no one he wished 
to approach. 

“Say, Hank Rearden, you’re not such a bad fellow at all when 
seen close up in the lion's own den. You ought to give us a press 
conference once in a while, you’d win us over.” 

Rearden turned and looked at the speaker incredulously. It was a 
young newspaperman of the seedier sort, who worked on a radical 
tabloid. Ihe offensive familiarity of his manner seemed to imply that 
he chose to be rude to Rearden because he knew that Rearden 
should never have permitted himself to associate with a man of his 
kind. 

Rearden would not have allowed him inside the mills; but the man 
was Lillian’s guest; he controlled himself: he asked dryly, “What do 
you want?” 

“You’re not so bad. You’ve got talent. Technological talent. But. 
of course, I don’t agree with you about Rearden Metal.” 

“I haven’t asked you to agree.” 

“Well, Bertram Scudder said that your policy—” the man started 
belligerently, pointing toward the bar, but stopped, as if he had slid 
farther than he intended. 

Rearden looked at the untidy figure slouched against the bar. Lil- 
lian had introduced them, but he had paid no attention to the name. 
He turned sharply and walked off, in a manner that forbade the 
young bum to tag him. 

Lillian glanced up at his face, when Rearden approached her in 

133 



the midst of a group, and, without a word, stepped aside where they 
could not be heard. 

“Is that Scudder of The Future T y he asked, pointing. 

“Why, yes.” 

He looked at her silently, unable to begin to believe it, unable to 
find the lead of a thought with which to begin to understand. Her 
eyes were watching him. 

“How could you invite him here?" he asked. 

“Now, Henry, don't let's be ridiculous. You don’t want to be narrow- 
minded, do you? You must learn to tolerate the opinions of others 
and respect their right of free speech.” 

“In my house?” 

“Oh, don't be stuffy!” 

He did not speak, because bis consciousness was held, not by co- 
herent statements, but by two pictures that seemed to glare at him 
insistently. He saw the article, “The Octopus,” by Bertram Scudder, 
which was not an expression of ideas, but a bucket of slime emptied 
in public— an article that did not contain a single fact, not even an 
invented one, but poured a stream of sneers and adjectives in which 
nothing was dear except the filthy malice of denouncing without 
considering proof necessary. And he saw the lines of Lillian's profile, 
the proud purity which he had sought in marrying her. 

When he noticed her again, he realized that the vision of her 
profile was in his own mind, because she was turned to him fullface, 
watching him. In the sudden instant of returning to reality, he 
thought that what he saw in her eyes was enjoyment. But m the 
next instant he reminded himself that he was sane and that this was 
not possible. 

“It's the first time you've invited that . . .” he used an obscene 
word with unemotional precision, “to my house. It's the last." 

“How dare you use such-—" 

“Don't argue, Lillian. If you do. HI throw him out right now " 

He gave -her a moment to answer, to object, to scream at him if 
she wished. She remained silent, not looking at him. only her smooth 
cheeks seemed faintly drawn inward, as il deflated 

Moving blindly away through the coils of lights, voices and per- 
fume, he felt a cold touch of dread. He knew that he should think 
of Lillian and find the answer to the riddle of her character, because 
this was a revelation which he could not ignore; but he did not think 
of her — and he felt the dread because he knew that the answer had 
ceased to matter to him long ago. 

The flood of weariness was starting to rise again. He felt as if he 
could almost see it in thickening waves; it was not within him. but 
outside, spreading through the room. For an instant, he felt as if he 
were alone, lost in a gray desert, needing help and kno\*ji ng that no 
help would come. 

He stopped short. In the lighted doorway, the length df the room 
between them, he saw the tall, arrogant figure of a mtln who had 
paused for a moment before entering. He had never m|t the man, 
but of all the notorious faces that cluttered the pages of Newspapers, 
this was the one he despised. It was Francisco d’Anconik 

134 



Rearden had never given much thought to men like Bertram Scud- 
der. But with every hour of his life, with the strain and the pride of 
every moment when his muscles or his mind had ached from effort, 
with every step he had taken to rise out of the mines of Minnesota 
and to turn his effort into gold, with all of his profound respect for 
money and for its meaning, he despised the squanderer who did not 
know how to deserve the great gift of inherited wealth. There, he 
thought, was the most contemptible representative of the species. 

He saw Francisco d’Anconia enter, bow to Lillian, then walk into 
the crowd as if he owned the room which he had never entered 
betore. Heads turned to watch him, as if he pulled them on strings 
in his wake. 

Approaching Lillian once more, Rearden said without anger, the 
contempt becoming amusement in his voice, “T didn’t know you 
knew that one.” 

‘Tve met him at a few parties.” 

“Is he one of your friends, too?'* 

“Certainly not!” The sharp resentment was genuine. 

“Then why did you invite him?” 

“Well, you can't give a party — not a party that counts — while he’s 
in this country, without inviting him. It’s a nuisance it he comes, and 
a social black mark if he doesn’t.” 

Rearden laughed. She was off guard; she did not usually admit 
things of this kind, “Look,” he said wearily, “I don’t want to spoil 
your party. But keep that man away from me. Don’t come around 
with introductions. I don’t want to meet him. I don’t know how 
you’ll work that, but you’re an expert hostess, so work it.” 

Dagny stood still when she saw Francisco approaching. He bowed 
to her as he passed by. He did not stop, but she knew that he had 
stopped the moment in his mind. She saw him smile faintly in delib- 
etate emphasis of what he understood and did not choose to ac- 
knowledge. She turned away. She hoped to avoid him for the rest 
of the evening. 

Balph Eubank had joined the group around Dr. Pritchett, and was 
saying, sullenly, “. . . no, you cannot expect people to understand 
the higher reaches of philosophy. Culture should be taken out of the 
hands of the dollar-chasers. We need a national subsidy for literature. 
It is disgraceful that artists are treated like peddlers and that art 
works have to be sold like soap.” 

“You mean, your complaint is that they don't sell like soap?” 
asked Francisco d’Anconia. 

1'hey had not noticed him apptoach; the conversation stopped, as 
if slashed off; most of them had never met him, but they all recog- 
nized him at once. 

“I meant — ” Balph Eubank started angrily and closed his mouth; 
he saw the eager interest on the faces of his audience, but it was 
not interest in philosophy any longer. 

“Why, hello. Professor!” said Francisco, bowing to Dr. Pritchett 

There was no pleasure in Dr, Pritchett’s face when be answered 
the greeting and performed a few introductions. 

135 



“We were just discussing a most interesting subject,” said the ear- 
nest matron* “Dr. Pritchett was telling us that nothing is anything.” 

“He should, undoubtedly, know more than anyone else about 
that,” Francisco answered gravely. 

“I wouldn’t have supposed that you knew Dr. Pritchett so well, 
Sefior d’Anconia,” she said, and wondered why the professor looked 
displeased by her remark. 

“I am an alumnus of the great school that employs Dr. Pritchett 
at present, the Patrick Henry University. But l studied under one of 
his predecessors — Hugh Akston.” 

“Hugh Akston!” the attractive young woman gasped. “But you 
couldn’t have, Sefior d’Anconta! You're not old enough. 1 thought 
he was one of those great names of . . . of the last century.” 

“Perhaps in spirit, madame. Not in fact.” 

“But I thought he died years ago.” 

“Why, no. He’s still alive.” 

“Then why don’t we ever hear about him anymore?” 

“He retired, nine years ago.” 

“Isn’t it odd? When a politician or a movie star retires, we read 
front page stories about it. But when a philosopher retires, people 
do not even notice it.” 

“They do, eventually.” 

A young man said, astonished. “1 thought Hugh Akston was one 
of those classics that nobody studied any more, except m histories 
of philosophy. I read an article recently which referred to him as the 
last of the great advocates of reason.” 

“Just what did Hugh Akston teach?” asked the earnest matron. 

Francisco answered, “He taught that everything is something.” 

“Your loyalty to your teacher is laudable, Sefior d’Anconia.” said 
Dr. Pritchett dryly. “May we take it that you are an example of the 
practical results of his teaching?” 

“I am.” , 

James Taggart had approached the group and was waiting to be 
noticed. 

“Hello, Francisco.” 

“Good evening, James.” 

“What a wonderful coincidence, seeing you here! I’ve been very 
anxious to speak to you.” 

“Thai’s new. You haven’t always been.” 

“Now you’re joking, just like in the old days,” Taggart was moving 
slowly, as if casually, away from the group, hoping to draw Francisco 
after him. “You know that there’s not a person in this room who 
wouldn’t love to talk to you.” 

“Really? I’d he inclined to suspect the opposite.” Fr$ncisco had 
followed obediently, but stopped within hearing distance of the 
others. 

“I have tried in every possible way to get in touch will you,” said 
Taggart, “but . . . but circumstances didn’t permit me t4 succeed.” 

“Are you trying to hide from me the fact that I refused to see 
you?” 

“Well . . . that is ... I mean, why did you refuse?” 

136 



“I couldn’t imagine what you wanted to speak to me about.” 

‘ The San Sebastian Mines, of course!” Taggart’s voice rose a little. 

“Why, what about them?” 

“But . . . Now, look, Francisco, this is serious. It’s a disaster, an 
unprecedented disaster — and nobody can make any sense out of it. 

1 don’t know what to think. I don’t understand it at all. I have a 
right to know.” 

“A right? Aren’t you being old-fashioned, James? But what is it 
you want to know?” 

“Well, first of all, that nationalization — what are you going to do 
about it?” 

“Nothing.” 

“Nothing?!” 

“But surely you don’t want me to do anything about it. My mines 
and your railroad were seized by the will of the people. You wouldn’t 
want me to oppose the will ot the people, would you?” 

“Francisco, this is not a laughing matter!” 

“I never thought it was.” 

“I’m entitled to an explanation! You owe your stockholders an 
account of the whole disgraceful affair! Why did you pick a worthless 
mine? Why did you waste ail those millions? What sort ot rotten 
swindle was it?” 

Francisco stood looking at him in polite astonishment. “Why, 
James,” he said, “l thought you would approve of it.” 

“Approve?!” 

“I thought you would consider the San Sebastian Mines as the 
practical realization of an ideal of the highest moral order. Remem- 
bering that you and I have disagreed so often in the past, I thought 
you would be gratified to see me acting in accordance with your 
principles.” 

“What are you talking about?” 

Francisco shook his head regretfully. “I don't know why you 
should call my behavior rotten. 1 thought you would recognize it as 
an honest effort to practice what the whole world is preaching. 
Doesn’t everyone believe that it is evil to be selfish? I was totally 
sellless in regard to the San Sebastian project. Isn’t it evil to pursue 
a personal interest? I had no personal interest in it whatever. Isn’t it 
evil to work tor profit? 1 did not work for profit — I took a loss. Doesn’t 
everyone agree that the purpose and justification of an industrial 
enterprise are not production, but the livelihood of its employees? 
The San Sebastian Mines were the most eminently successful venture 
in industrial history: they produced no copper, but they provided a 
livelihood for thousands of men who could not have achieved in a 
lifetime, the equivalent of what they got for one day’s work, which 
they could not do. Isn’t it generally agreed that an owner is a parasite 
and an exploiter, that it is the employees who do all the work and 
make the product possible? 1 did not exploit anyone. I did not bur- 
den the San Sebastian Mines with my useless presence; l left them 
in the hands of the men who count I did not pass judgment on the 
value of that property. I turned it over to a mining specialist. 
He was not a very good specialist, but hd needed the job very 

137 



badly. Isn't it generally conceded that when yon hire a man for a 
job, it is his need that counts, not his ability? Doesn’t everyone 
believe that in order to get the goods, ail you have to do is need 
them? I have carried out every moral precept of our age. 1 expected 
gratitude and a citation of honor. I do not understand why I am 
being damned,” 

In the silence of those who had listened, the sole comment was 
the shrill, sudden giggle of Betty Pope' she had understood nothing, 
but she saw the look of helpless fury on James Taggart’s face. 

People were looking at Taggart, expecting an answer. They were 
indifferent to the issue, they were merely amused by the spectacle 
of someone’s embarrassment. Taggart achieved a patronizing smile. 

“You don’t expect me to take this seriously?” he asked. 

“There was a time,” Francisco answered, “when 1 did not believe 
that anyone could take it seriously. I was wrong.” 

“This is outrageous!” Taggart’s voice started to rise. “It's perfectly 
outrageous to treat your public responsibilities with such thoughtless 
levity!” He turned to hurry away. 

Francisco shrugged, spreading his hands. “You sec? I didn't think 
you wanted to speak to me.” 

Reardcn stood alone, far at the other end of the room Philip 
noticed him, approached and waved to Lillian, calling her over. 

“Lillian, I don’t think that Henry is having a good time,” he said, 
smiling; one could not tell whether the mockery ot his smile was 
directed at Lillian or at Rearden. “Can’t we do something about it?” 

“Oh, nonsense!” said Rearden 

“1 wish I knew what to do about it, Philip,” said Lillian. “I've 
always wished Henry would learn to relax. He’s so grimly serious 
about everything. He’s such a rigid Puritan. I’ve always wanted to see 
him drunk, just once, Bui I’ve given up. What would you suggest?” 

“Oh. I don't know! But he shouldn’t be standing around all by 
himself.” # 

“Drop it.” said Rearden. While thinking dimly that he did not 
want to hurl their feelings, he could not prevent himself from adding, 
“You don’t know how hard I’ve tried to be left standing all by 
myself.” 

“There — you see?” Lillian smiled at Philip. * To enjoy life and 
people is not so simple as pouring a ton of steel. Intellectual pursuits 
are not learned in the market place.” 

Philip chuckled. “It’s not intellectual pursuits I’m worried about. 
How sure are you about that Puritan stuff, Lillian? (f I were you, 1 
wouldn’t leave him free to look around. There are too many beauti- 
ful women here tonight.” 

“Henry entertaining thoughts of infidelity? You flatterihim, Philip. 
You overestimate his courage.” She smiled at Keardeii coldly, for 
a brief, stressed moment, then moved away. 

Rearden looked at his brother. “What in hell dc< you think 
you're doing?” 

“Oh, stop playing the Puritan! Can’t you take a joke?” 

Moving aimlessly through the crowd, Dagny wondered why she 
had accepted the invitation to this party. The answer astonished her: 

138 



it was because she had wanted to see Hank Rearden. Watching him 
in the crowd* she realized the contrast for the first time. The faces 
of the others looked like aggregates of interchangeable features, 
every face oozing to blend into the anonymity of resembling all, and 
all looking as if they were melting. Rearden’s face, with the sharp 
planes, the pale blue eyes, the ash-blond hair, had the firmness of 
ice; the uncompromising clarity of its lines made it look, among the 
others, as if he were moving through a fog, hit by a ray of light. 

Her eyes kept returning to him involuntarily. She never caught 
him glancing in her direction. She could not believe that he was 
avoiding her intentionally; there could be no possible reason for it; 
yet she felt certain that he was. She wanted to approach him and 
convince herself that she was mistaken. Something stopped her; she 
could not understand her own reluctance. 

Rearden bore patiently a conversation with his mother and two 
ladies whom she wished him to entertain with stones of his youth 
and his struggle. He complied, telling himself that she was proud of 
him in her own way, But he felt as if something in her manner kept 
suggesting that she had nursed him through his struggle and that she 
was the source of his success. He was glad when she let him go. 
Then he escaped once more to the recess of the window. 

He stood there for a while, leaning on a sense of privacy as if it 
were a physical support 

‘’Mr. Rearden," said a strangely quiet voice beside him, ’permit 
me to introduce myself. My name is d'Anconia.” 

Rearden turned, startled; d'Aneonia's manner and voice had a 
quality he had seldom encountered before: a lone of authentic 
respect 

‘How do you do," he answered. His voice was brusque and dry; 
but he had answered. 

“1 have observed that Mrs. Rearden has been trying to avoid the 
necessity of presenting me to you. and 1 can guess the reason. Would 
you prefer that I leave your house 7 " 

7 he action of naming an issue instead of evading it. was so unlike 
the usual behavior of all the men he knew, it was such a sudden, 
st ailling relief, that Rearden remained silent for a moment, studying 
d'Anconia’s face. Francisco had said it very simply, neither as a re- 
proach nor a plea, but in a manner which, strangely, acknowledged 
Reardon’s dignity and his own. 

“No," said Rearden. “whatever else you guessed, i did not say 
that.” 

“ t hank you. In that case, you will allow me to speak to you.” 

“Why should you wish to speak to me?” 

“My motives cannot interest you at present.” 

“Mine is not the sort of conversation that could interest you at 
all.” 

“You are mistaken about one of us, Mr. Rearden, or both. I came 
to this party solely in order to meet you,” 

There had been a taint tone of amusement in Rearden's voice; 
now it hardened into a hint of contempt. “You started by playing it 
straight. Stick to it.” 


139 



“I am.” 

”What did you want to meet me for? In order to make me lose 
money?” 

Francisco looked straight at him. “Yes — eventually.” 

“What is it, this time? A gold mine?” 

Francisco shook his head slowly; the conscious deliberation of the 
movement gave it an air that was almost sadness. “No,” he said, “I 
don’t want to sell you anything. As a matter of fact, I did not attempt 
to sell the copper mine to James Taggart, either. He came to me for 
it. You won’t.” 

Rearden chuckled. “If you understand that much, we have at least 
a sensible basis for conversation. Proceed on that. If you don’t have 
some fancy investment in mind, what did you want to meet me for?” 

“In order to become acquainted with you.” 

“That's not an answer. It’s just another way of saying the same 
thing.” 

“Not quite, Mr. Rearden.” 

“Unless you mean — in order to gain my confidence?” 

“No. I don’t like people who speak or think in terms of gaining 
anybody’s confidence. If one’s actions are honest, one does not need 
the predated confidence of others, only their rational perception. The 
person who craves a moral blank check of that kind, has dishonest 
intentions, whether he admits it to himself or not." 

Rearden’s startled glance at him was like the involuntary thrust 
of a hand grasping for support in a desperate need. The glance be- 
trayed how f much he wanted to find the soit of man he thought he 
was seeing. Then Rearden lowered his e>es; almost closing them, 
slowly, shutting out the vision and the need. His face was hard, it 
had an expression of severity, an inner seventy directed at himself; 
it looked austere and lonely. 

“All right," he said tonelessly. “What do you want, if it's not 
my confidence?” 

“1 want'to learn to understand you.” 

“What for?” 

“For a reason of my own which need not concern you at present.” 

“What do you want to understand about me?” 

Francisco looked silently out at the darkness. The lire of the mills 
was dying down. There was only a faint tinge of red left on the edge 
of the earth, just enough to outline the scraps of clouds ripped by 
the tortured battle of the storm in the sky. Dim shapes kept sweeping 
through space and vanishing, shapes which were branches, but 
looked as if they were the fury of the wind made visible. 

“It’s a terrible night for any animal caught unprotected on that 
plain,” said Francisco d’Anconia. “This is when one should appreci- 
ate the meaning of being a man.” 

Rearden did not answer for a moment; then he said, as if in answer 
to himself, a tone of wonder in his voice, “Funny . . 

“What?” 

“You told me what I was thinking just a while ago . 

“You were?” ■ 

“. . . only I didn’t have the words for it.” 

140 



“Shall I tell you the rest of the words?” 

“Go ahead.” 

“You stood here and watched the storm with the greatest pride 
one can ever feel— because you are able to have summer flowers 
and half- naked women in your house on a night like this, in demon- 
stration of your victory over that storm. And if it weren’t for you, 
most of those who are here would be left helpless at the mercy of 
that wind in the middle of some such plain.” 

“How did you know that?” 

In time with his question, Rearden realized that it was not his 
thoughts this man had named, but his most hidden, most personal 
emotion; and that he, who would never confess his emotions to any- 
one, had confessed it in his question. He saw the faintest flicker in 
Francisco’s eyes, as of a smile or a check mark. 

“What would vou know about a pride of that kind?” Rearden 
asked sharply, as if the contempt of the second question could erase 
the confidence of the first. 

“That is what 1 felt once, when I was young.” 

Rearden looked at him. There was neither mockery nor self-pity 
in Francisco’s face; the fine, sculptured planes and the dear, blue 
eyes held a quiet composure, the face was open, offered to any 
blow, unflinching. 

“Why do you want to talk about it?” Rearden asked, prompted 
by a moment’s reluctant compassion. 

“Let us say — by way of gratitude, Mr. Rearden.” 

“Gratitude to me?” 

“If you will accept it.” 

Rearden’s voice hardened. “I haven’t asked for gratitude. 1 don't 
need it.” 

“1 have not said you needed it. But of all those whom you are 
saving Irom the storm tonight, l am the only one who will offer it.” 

After a moment’s silence, Rearden asked, his voice low with a 
sound which was almost a threat. “What are you trying to do?” 

“1 am calling your attention to the nature of those for whom you 
are working.” 

“It would take a man who’s never done an honest day’s work in 
his life, to think or say that.” The contempt in Rearden’s voice had 
a note of relief; he had been disarmed by a doubt of his judgment 
on the character of his adversary; now he felt certain once more. 
“You wouldn’t understand it if l told you that the man who works, 
works for himself, even if he does carry the whole wretched bunch 
of you along. Now ill guess what you’re thinking: go ahead, say that 
it’s evil, that I’m selfish, conceited, heartless, cruel. 1 am. I don’t 
want any part of that tripe about working for others. I'm not.” 

For the first time, he saw the look of a personal reaction iir Fran- 
cisco’s eyes, the look of something eager and young. “The only thing 
that’s wrong in what you said,” Francisco answered, “is that you 
permit anyone to call it evil.” In Rearden’s pause of incredulous 
silence, he pointed at the crowd in the drawing room. “Why are you 
willing to carry them?” 

“Because they’re a bunch of miserable children who struggle to 

141 



remain alive, desperately and very badly, while I — I don't even notice 
the burden." 

"Why don’t you tell them that? 1 ' 

"What?" 

"That you’re working for your own sake, not theirs." 

"They know it." 

"Oh yes, they know it. Every single one of them here knows it. 
But they don’t think you do. And the aim of all their efforts is to 
keep you from knowing it." 

"Why should I care what they think?” 

"Because it’s — a battle in which one must make one’s stand clear.” 

"A battle? What battle? 1 hold the whip hand. I don’t light the 
disarmed.” 

"Are they? They have a weapon against you. It's their only 
weapon, but it's a terrible one Ask yourself what it is, some time.” 

"Where do you see any evidence of it?” 

"in the unforgivable fact that you’re as unhappy as you are.” 

Kearden could accept any form of reproach, abuse, damnation 
anyone chose to throw at him: the only human reaction which he 
would not accept was pity. The slab of a coldly rebellious anger 
brought him back to the full context of the moment He spoke, 
fighting not to acknowledge the nature of the emotion rising within 
him. "What sort of effrontery are you indulging m? What’s your 
motive?” 

“Let us say -to give you the words you need, for the time when 
you’ll need them.” 

“Why should you want to speak to me on such a subject?" 

‘In the hope that you will remember it.” 

What he felt, thought Rearden, was anger at the incomprehensible 
fact that he had allowed himself to enjoy this conversation. He fell 
a dim sense of betrayal, the hint of an unknown danger. “Do you 
expect me to forget what you are?*' he asked, knowing that this was 
what he had forgotten, 

“1 do not expect you to think of me at all.” 

Under his anger, the emotion which Rearden would not acknowl- 
edge remained unstated and unlhought; he knew it only as a hint of 
pain. Had he faced it, he would have known that he still heard 
Francisco’s voice saying, “1 am the only one who will offer it ... if 
you will accept it. . . .” He heard the words and the strangely solemn 
inflection of the quiet voice and an inexplicable answer ol his own, 
something within him that wanted to cry yes. to accept, to tell this 
man that he accepted, that he needed it — though there was no name 
for what he needed, it was not gratitude, and he knew that it was 
not gratitude this man had meant. 

Aloud, he said, “I didn’t seek to talk to you. But you’ve asked 
for it and you’re going to hear it. To me. there’s only;’ one form of 
human depravity — the man without a purpose." 

“That is true." 

"I can forgive all those others, they’re not vicious, they’re merely 
helpless. But you— you’re the kind who can’t be forgiven." 

"It is against the sin of forgiveness that I wanted to f warn you.” 

142 



“You had the greatest chance in life. What have you done with 
it? If you have the mind to understand all the things you said, how 
can you speak to me at ail? How can you face anyone after the sort 
of irresponsible destruction you've perpetrated in that Mexican 
business? 1 ’ 

“It is your right to condemn me for it, if you wish/ 1 

Dagny stood by the corner of the window recess, listening. They 
did not notice her. She had seen them together and she had ap- 
proached, drawn by an impulse she could not explain or resist; it 
seemed crucially important that she know what these two men said 
to each other. 

She had heard their last few sentences. She had never thought it 
possible that she would see Francisco taking a beating. He could 
smash any adversary in any form of encounter. Yet he stood, offering 
no defense. She knew that it was not indifference; she knew his face 
well enough to see the effort his calm cost him — she saw the faint 
line of a muscle pulled tight across his cheek. 

“Of all those who live by the ability of others/’ said Rearden, 
“you’re the one real parasite/ 1 

“I have given you grounds to think so/’ 

“Then what right have you to talk about the meaning of being a 
man? You’re the one who has betrayed it.” 

“1 am sorry if 1 have offended you by what you may rightly con- 
sider as a presumption/ 1 

Francisco bowed and turned to go. Rearden said involuntarily, not 
knowing that the question negated his anger, that it was a plea to 
stop this man and hold him, “What did you want to learn to under- 
stand about me?” 

Francisco turned. The expression of his face had not changed; it 
was still a look of gravely courteous respect. “I have learned it/’ 
he answered. 

Rearden stood watching him as he walked off into the crowd. The 
figures of a butler, with a crystal dish, and of Dr. Pritchett, stooping 
to choose another canape, hid Francisco from sight. Rearden glanced 
out at the darkness; nothing could be seen there but the wind. 

Dagny stepped forward, when he came out of the recess; she 
smiled, openly inviting conversation. He stopped. It seemed to her 
that he had stopped reluctantly. She spoke hastily, to break the si- 
lence. “Hank, why do you have so many intellectuals of the looter 
persuasion here? I wouldn’t have them in my house.” 

This was not what she had wanted to say to him. But she did not 
know what she wanted to say; never before had she felt herself left 
wordless in his presence. 

She saw his eyes narrowing, like a d<x>r being closed. “I see no 
reason why one should not invite them to a party,” he answered 
coldly. 

’ “Oh, 1 didn’t mean to criticize your choice of guests. But . . . Well, 
I’ve been trying not to leam which one of them is Bertram Scudder. 
If I‘ do, I’U slap his face/ 1 She tried to sound casual. “I don’t want 
to create a scene, but I’m not sure I’ll be able to control myself. I 

143 



couldn't believe it when somebody told me that Mrs. Rearden had 
invited him.” 

*7 invited him.” 

“But . , Then her voice dropped. “Why?' 5 

“I don't attach any importance to occasions of this kind.” 

“Tm sorry, Hank. I didn't know you were so tolerant. I’m not.'* 

He said nothing. 

“I know you don't like parties. Neither do l. But sometimes l 
wonder . . . perhaps we’re the only ones who were meant to be able 
to enjoy them.” 

“I am afraid I have no talent for it.” 

“Not for this. But do you think any of these people are enjoying 
it? They’re just straining to be more senseless and aimless than usual. 
To be light and unimportant . . . You know, I think that only if one 
feels immensely important can one feel truly light,” 

“I wouldn’t know.” 

“It’s just a thought that disturbs me once in a while. ... I thought 
it about my first ball. ... I keep thinking that parties are intended 
to be celebrations, and celebrations should be only for those who 
have something to celebrate.” 

“I have never thought of it.” 

She could not adapt her words to the rigid formality of his manner; 
she could not quite believe it. They had always been at ease together, 
in his oflice. Now he was like a man in a strait jacket. 

“Hank, look at it. If you didn't know any of these people, wouldn’t 
it seem beautiful? The lights and the clothes and all the imagination 
that went to make it possible . She was looking at the room. 
She did not notice that he had not followed her glance. He was 
looking down at the shadows on her naked shoulder, the soft, blue 
shadows made by the light that fell through the strands of her hair. 
“Why have we left it all to fools? It should have been ours.” 

“In what manner?” 

“I don’t know . . . I’ve always expected parties to be exciting and 
brilliant, like some rare drink.” She laughed; there was a note of 
sadness in it, “But I don't drink, either. That’s just another symbol 
that doesn’t mean what it was intended to mean.” He was silent. 
She added, “Perhaps there's something that we have missed.” 

“I am not aware of it.” 

In a flash of sudden, desolate emptiness, she was glad that he had 
not understood or responded, feeling dimly that she had revealed 
too much, yet not knowing what she had revealed. She shrugged, 
the movement running through the curve of her shoulder like a faint 
convulsion. “It’s just an old illusion of mine,” she said indifferently. 
“Just a mood that comes once every year or two, Let me see the 
latest steel price index and I’ll forget all about it.” 

She did not know that his eyes were following her, as $io walked 
away from him. 

She moved slowly through the room, looking at no o nip. She no- 
ticed a small group huddled by the unlighted fireplace. ;The room 
was not coki, but they sat as if they drew comfort from the thought 
of a non-existent fire. 


144 



“I do not know why, but I am growing to be afraid of the dark. 
No, not now, only when I am alone. What frightens me is night 
Night as such.” 

The speaker was an elderly spinster with an air of breeding and 
hopelessness. The three women and two men of the group were well 
dressed, the skin of their faces was smoothly well tended, but they 
had a manner of anxious caution that kept their voices one tone 
lower than normal and blurred the differences of (heir ages, giving 
them all the same gray look of being spent. It was the look one saw 
in groups of respectable people everywhere. Dagny stopped and 
listened. 

“But my dear,” one of them asked, “why should it frighten you?” 

“1 don’t know.” said the spinster. ”1 am not afraid of prowlers or 
robberies or anything of the sort. But 1 stay awake all night. I fall 
asleep only when I see the sky turning pale. It is very odd. Every 
evening, when it grows dark, 1 get the feeling that this time it is 
final, that daylight will not return.” 

“My cousin who lives on the coast of Maine wrote me the same 
thing,” said one of the women. 

“Last night,” said the spinster, “I stayed awake because of the 
shooting. There were guns going off all night, way out at sea. There 
were no flashes. There was nothing. Just those detonations, at long 
intcivals. somewhere in the fog over the Atlantic.” 

“I read something about it m the paper this morning. Coast Guard 
target practice.” 

“Why, no.” the spinster said indifferently. “Everybody down on 
the shore knows what it was. U was Ragnar Danneskjold. It was the 
Coast Guard trying to catch him.” 

“Ragnar Danneskjdld in Delaware Bay?” a woman gasped. 

“Oh, yes. They say it is not the first time.” 

“Did they catch him?” 

“No.” 

“Nobody can catch him,” said one of the men, 

“The People’s State of Norway has offered a mi Uion-dollar reward 
for his head.” 

“Thafs an awful lot of money to pay for a pirate’s head.” 

“But how are we going to have any order or security or planning 
in the world, with a pirate running loose all over the seven seas?” 

“Do you know what it was that he seized last night?” said the 
spinster. “The big ship with the relief supplies we were sending to 
the People’s State of France.” 

“How does he dispose of the goods he seizes?” 

“Ah, that— nobody knows.” 

“I met a sailor once, from a ship he'd attacked, who’d seen him 
in person. He said that Ragnar Danneskjdld has the purest gold hair 
and the most frightening face on earth, a face with no sign of any 
feeling. If there ever was a man bom without a heart, he’s it — the 
sailor said.” 

“A nephew of mine saw Ragnar DanneskjttkTs ship one night, off 
the coast of Scotland. He wrote me that he couldn’t believe his 

145 



eyes. It was a belter ship than any in the navy of the People’s State 
of England.’' 

“They say he hides in one of those Norwegian fjords where neither 
God nor man will ever Find him. That’s where the Vikings used to 
hide in the Middle Ages.” 

’‘There’s a reward on his head offered by the People’s State of 
Portugal, too. And by the People’s State of Turkey.” 

“They say it's a national scandal in Norway. He comes from one 
of their best families. The family lost its money generations ago, but 
the name is of the noblest. The ruins of their castle are still in exis- 
tence. His father is a bishop. His father has disowned him and ex- 
communicated him. But it had no effect.” 

“Did you know that Ragnar DanneskjOld went to school in this 
country? Sure. The Patrick Henry University.” 

“Not realty?” 

“Oh yes. You can took it up.” 

“What bothers me is . . . You know, 1 don’t like it. I don’t like it 
that he’s now appearing right here, in our own waters. 1 thought 
things like that could happen only in the wastelands. Only in Europe. 
But a big-scale outlaw of that kind operating in Delaware m our day 
and age!” 

“He’s been seen off Nantucket, too. And at Bar Harbor. The 
newspapers have been asked not to write about it.” 

“Why?” 

“They don’t want people to know that the navy can’t cope with 
him.” 

“i don’t like it. It feels funny It's like something out of the 
Dark Ages.” 

Dagny glanced up. She saw Francisco d'Anconia standing a few 
steps away. He was looking at her with a kind of stressed curiosity; 
his eyes were mocking. 

“It's a strange world we’re living in,” said the spinster, her voice 
low. 

“I read an article,” said one of the women foneltwsly. ‘it said that 
times of trouble aie good for us. It is good that people are growing 
poorer. To accept privations is a moral virtue.” 

“I suppose so,” said another, without conviction. 

“We must not worry. 1 heard a speech that said it is useless to 
worry or to blame anyone. Nobody can help what he does, that is 
the way things made him. There is nothing we can do about anything. 
We must learn to bear it.” 

“What’s the use anyway? What is man’s fate? Hasn’t it always 
been to hope, but never to achieve? The wise man is the one who 
does not attempt to hope,” 

“That is the right attitude to take.” 

“1 don’t know ... I don't know what is right any mor^ . . . How 
can we ever know?” 

“Oh well, who is John Galt?” 

Dagny turned brusquely and started away from them. One of the 
women followed her. 


146 



“But 1 do know it,” said the woman, in the soft, mysterious tone 
of sharing a secret. 

“You know what?” 

“1 know who is John Galt.” 

“Who?” Dagny asked tensely, stopping. 

“I know a man who knew John GaJt in person. This man is an 
old friend of a great-aunt of mine. He was there and he saw it 
happen. Do you know the legend of Atlantis, Miss Taggart?” 

“What?” 

“Atlantis.” 

“Why . . . vaguely.” 

“The isles of the Blessed. That is what the Greeks called it, thou- 
sands of years ago. They said Atlantis was a place where hero-spirits 
lived in a happiness unknown to the rest of the earth. A place which 
only the spirits of heroes could enter, and they reached it without 
dying, because they carried the secret of life within them. Atlantis 
was lost to mankind, even then. But the Greeks knew that it had 
existed. They tried to find it. Some of them said it was underground, 
hidden in the heart of the earth. But most of them said it was an 
island. A radiant island in the Western Ocean. Perhaps what they 
were thinking of was America. They never found it. For centuries 
afterward, men said it was only a legend. They did not believe it, 
but they never stopped looking for it. because they knew that that 
was what they had to find.” 

“Well, what about John Galt?” 

“He found it.” 

Dagny ’s interest was gone “Who was he?” 

“John Galt was a millionaire, a man of inestimable wealth. He 
was sailing his yacht one night, in mid-Atlantic, fighting the worst 
storm ever wt caked upon the world, when he found it. He saw it in 
the depth, where it had sunk to escape the reach of men. He saw 
the toweis of Atlantis shining on the bottom of the ocean. It was a 
sight of such kind that when one had seen it. one could no longer 
wish to look at the rest of the earth. John Galt sank his ship and 
went down with his entire crew. They all chose to do it. My friend 
was the only one who survived.” 

“How mtciesting.” 

“My friend saw it with his own eyes.” said the woman, offended. 
“It happened many years ago. But John Galt’s family hushed up 
the story.” 

“And what happened to his fortune? 1 don’t recall ever hearing 
of a Galt fortune.” 

“It went down with him.” She added belligerently, “You don’t 
have to believe it.” 

“Miss Taggart doesn't,” said Francisco d'Aticoiua. “I do.” 

I hey turned. He had followed them and he stood looking at them 
with the insolence of exaggerated earnestness. 

“Have you ever had faith in anything. Sefior d'Anconia?” the 
woman asked angrily, 

“No, madame?’ 


147 



He chuckled at her brusque departure. Dagny asked coldly, 
“What’s the joke?” 

“The joke’s on that fool woman. She doesn't know that she was 
telling you the truth.” 

“Do you expect me to believe that?” 

“No.” 

“Then what do you find so amusing?” 

“Oh, a great many things here. Don’t you?” 

“No,” 

“Well, that's one of the things 1 find amusing.” 

“Francisco, will you leave me alone?” 

“But I have. Didn't you notice that you were first to speak to 
me tonight?” 

“Why do you keep watching me?” 

“Curiosity.” 

“About what?” 

“Your reaction to the things which you don’t find amusing.” 

“Why should you care about my reaction to anything?” 

“That is my own way of having a good time, which, incidentally, 
you are not having, are you, Dagny? Besides, you’re the only woman 
worth watching here.” 

She stood defiantly still, because the way he looked at her de- 
manded an angry escape. She stood as she always did. straight and 
taut, her head lifted impatiently. It was the unfemmine pose of an 
executive. But her naked shoulder betrayed the fragility of the hotly 
under the black dress, and the pose made her most truly a woman. 
The proud strength became a challenge to someone's superior 
strength, and the fragility a reminder that the challenge could be 
broken. She was not conscious of it. She had met no one able to 
see it. 

He said, looking down at her body. “Dagny, what a magnificent 
waste!” 

She had to turn and escape. She felt herself blushing, for the first 
time in yeats: blushing because she knew suddenly that the sentence 
named what she had felt all evening. 

She ran, trying not to think. The music stopped her. It was a 
sudden blast from the radio. She noticed Mort Liddy, who had 
turned it on, waving his arms to a group of friends, yelling. “That’s 
it! That's it! I want you to hear it!” 

The great burst of sound was the opening chords of Halley’s 
Fourth Concerto. It rose in tortured tiiumph, speaking its denial of 
pain, its hymn to a distant vision. Then the notes broke. It was as if 
a handful of mud and pebbles had been flung at the music, and what 
followed was the sound o t the rolling and the dripping. It was Hal- 
ley’s Concerto swung into a popular tune. It was Haller’s melody 
torn apart, its holes stuffed with hiccoughs. The great statement of 
joy had become the giggling of a barroom. Yet it was st{ll the rem- 
nant of Halley’s melody that gave it form; it was the r^iclody that 
supported it like a spinal cord. 

“Pretty good?” Mort Liddy was smiling at his friendi boastfully 
and nervously. “Pretty good, eh? Best movie score of the year. Got 

148 



me a prize. Got me a long-term contract. Yeah, this was my score 
for Heaven's in Your Backyard L” 

Dagny stood, staring at the room, as if one sense could replace 
another, as if sight could wipe out sound. She moved her head in a 
slow circle, trying to find an anchor somewhere. She saw Francisco 
leaning against a column, his arms crossed; he was looking straight 
at her; he was laughing. 

Don't shake like this, she thought. Get out of here. This was the 
approach of an anger she could not control. She thought: Say noth- 
ing. Walk steadily. Get out. 

She had started walking, cautiously, very slowly. She heard Lil- 
lian’s words and stopped. Lillian had said it many times this evening, 
in answer to the same question, but it was the first time that Dagny 
heard it. 

'This?’* Lillian was saying, extending her arm with the metal 
bracelet for the inspection of two smartly groomed women. “Why, 
no, it's not from a hardware store, it’s a very special gift from my 
husband. Oh, yes, of course it’s hideous. But don't you see? It’s 
supposed to be priceless. Of course. I’d exchange it for a common 
diamond bracelet any time, but somehow nobody will offer me one 
for it, even though it is so very, very valuable. Why? My dear, it’s 
the first thing ever made of Rearden Metal." 

Dagny did not see the room. She did not hear the music. She felt 
the pressure of dead stillness against her eardrums. She did not know 
the moment that preceded, or the moments that were to follow. She 
did not know those involved, neither herself, nor Lillian, nor Rear- 
den, nor the meaning of her own action. It was a single instant, 
blasted out of context. She had heard. She was looking at the brace- 
let of green-blue metal. 

She felt the movement of something being torn off her wrist, and 
she heard her own voice saying in I he great stillness, very calmly, a 
voice cold as a skeleton, naked of emotion, “If you are not the 
coward that I think you are, you will exchange it.” 

On the palm of her hand, she was extending her diamond bracelet 
to Lillian. 

“You're not serious. Miss Taggart?” said a woman's voice. 

It was not Lillian's voice. Lillian's eyes were looking straight at 
her. She saw them. Lillian knew that she was serious. 

“Give me that bracelet,” said Dagny, lifting her palm higher, the 
diamond band glittering across it. 

“This is horrible!” cried some woman. It was strange that the cry 
stood out so sharply. Then Dagny realized that there were people 
standing around them and that they ail stood in silence. She was 
hearing sounds now, even the music: it was Halley's mangled Con- 
certo, somewhere far away. 

She saw Rearden’s face. It looked as if something within him were 
mangled, like the music; she did not know by what. He was watch- 
ing them. 

Lillian’s mouth moved into an upturned crescent. It resembled a 
smile. She snapped the metal bracelet open, dropped it on Dagny ’s 
palm and took the diamond band. 

149 



“Thank you. Miss Taggart,*’ she said. 

Dagny ’$ fingers closed about the metal. She felt that; she felt noth- 
ing else. 

Lillian turned, because Rearden had approached her. He took the 
diamond bracelet Irom her hand. He clasped it on her wrist, raised 
her hand to his lips and kissed it. 

He did not look at Dagny. 

Lillian laughed, gaily, easily, attractively, bringing the room back 
to its normal mood 

“You may have it back. Miss Taggart, when you change your 
mind," she said. 

Dagny had turned away She felt calm and free. The pressure was 
gone. The need to get out had vanished. 

She clasped the metal bracelet on her wrist. She liked the feel of 
the weight against her skin. Inexplicably, she felt a touch of feminine 
vanity, the kind she had never experienced before: the desire to be 
seen wearing this particular ornament. 

From a distance, she heard snatches of indignant voices: “The 
most offensive gesture I’ve ever seen. . . It was vicious. . . I’m 
glad Lillian took her up on it. . . . Serves her right, it she feels like 
throwing a few thousand dollars away. . 

For the rest of the evening. Rearden remained by the side of his 
wife. He shared her conversations, lie laughed with her friends, he 
was suddenly the devoted, attentive, admiring husband. 

He was crossing the room, carrying a tray of drmks requested by 
someone in Lillian’s group — an unbecoming act oi informality which 
nobody had ever seen him perform- when Dagny approached him. 
She stopped and looked up at him, as it they were alone in his office 
She stood like an executive, her head lifted. He looked down at her. 
In the line of his glance, from the fingertips of her one hand to her 
face, her body was naked but for his metal bracelet. 

“I’m sorry. Hank,” she said, “but 1 had to do it.” 

His eyes remained expressionless. Yet she was suddenly ceitain 
that she knew what he felt: he wanted to slap her face. 

“It was not necessary,” he answered coldly, and walked on. 

* * 

It was very late when Rearden entered his wife’s bedroom. She 
was still awake. A lamp burned on her bedside table. 

She lay in bed, propped up on pillows of pale green linen. Her 
bedjacket was pale green satin, worn with the untouched perfection 
of a window model; its lustrous folds looked as if the crinkle of tissue 
paper still lingered among them. The light, shaded to a tone of apple 
blossoms, fell on a table that held a book, a glass of fruit juice, and 
toilet accessories of silver glittering like instruments in a surgeon’s 
case. Her arms had a tinge ot porcelain. There was a touch of pale 
pink lipstick on her mouth. She showed no sign of exhaustion after 
the party — no sign ot life to be exhausted. The place w$s a decora- 
tor’s display of a lady groomed for sleep, not to be disturbed. 

He still wore his dress clothes; his tie was loose, and! a strand of 
hair hung over his face. She glanced at him without astonishment, 
as if she knew what the last hour in his room had donef to him. 

150 



He looked at her silently. He had not entered her room for a long 
lime. He stood* wishing he had not entered it now. 

“Isn't it customary to talk, Henry?'” 

“If you wish.” 

“I wish you’d send one of your brilliant experts from the mills to 
take a look at our furnace. Do you know that it went out during the 
party and Simons had a terrible time getting it started again? . , . 
Mrs. Weston says that our best achievement is our cook ---she loved 
the hors d'oeuvres. . . . Balph Hubank said a very funny thing about 
you, he said you’re a crusader with a factory’s chimney smoke for a 
plume. . . . I’m glad you don’t like Francisco d’Anconia. 1 can’t 
stand him.” 

He did not care to explain his presence, or to disguise defeat, or 
to admit it by leaving. Suddenly, it did not matter to him what she 
guessed or felt. He walked to the window and stood, looking out. 

Why had she married him? —he thought It was a question he had 
not asked himself on their wedding day. eight years ago. Since then, 
in tortured loneliness, he had asked it many times. He had found 
no answer. 

It was not for position, he thought, or tor money. She came from 
an old family that had both. Her family’s name was not among the 
most distinguished and their fortune was modest, but both were suf- 
ficient to let her be included in the top circles of New York’s society, 
where he had met her. Nine years ago. he had appeared in New 
York like an explosion, m the glare of the success of Reaiden Steel, 
a success that had been thought impossible by the city’s experts. It 
was his indifference that made him spectacular. He did not know 
that he was expected to attempt to buy his way into society and that 
they anticipated the pleasure of rejecting him. He had no time to 
notice their disappointment. 

He attended, reluctantly, a few social occasions to which he was 
invited by men who sought his favor. He did not know, but they 
knew, that his courteous politeness was condescension toward the 
people who had expected to snub him, the people who had said that 
the age of achievement was past. 

It was Lillian’s austerity that attracted him — the conflict between 
her austerity and her behavior. He had never liked anyone or ex- 
pected to be liked. He found himself held by the spectacle of a 
woman who was obviously pursuing him but with obvious reluctance, 
as if against her own will, as if fighting a desire she resented. It was 
she who planned that they should meet, then faced him coldly* as if 
not caring that he knew it. She spoke little; she had an air of mystery 
that seemed to tell him he would never break through her proud 
detachment, and an air of amusement, mocking her own desire 
and his. 

He had not known many women. He had moved toward his goal, 
sweeping aside everything that did not pertain to it in the world and 
in himself. His dedication to his work was like one of the fires he 
dealt with, a fire that burned every lesser element, every impurity 
out of the white stream of a single metal. He was incapable of half- 
way concerns. But there were times when he felt a sudden access of 

151 



desire, so violent that it could not be given to a casual encounter. 
He had surrendered to it, on a few rare occasions through the years, 
with women he had thought he liked. He had been left feeling an 
angry emptiness — because he had sought an act of triumph, though 
he had not known of what nature, but the response he received was 
only a woman's acceptance of a casual pleasure, and he knew too 
clearly that what he had won had no meaning. He was left, not with 
a sense of attainment, but with a sense of his own degradation. He 
grew to hate his desire. He fought it. He came to believe the doctrine 
that this desire was wholly physical, a desire, not of consciousness, 
but of matter, and he rebelled against the thought that his llesh could 
be free to choose and that its choice was impervious to the will of 
his mind. He had spent his life in mines and mills, shaping matter 
to his wishes by the power of his brain — and he found it intolerable 
that he should be unable to control the matter of his own body. He 
fought it. He had won his every battle against inanimate nature; but 
this was a battle he lost. 

It was the difficulty of the conquest that made him want Lillian. 
She seemed to be a woman who expected and deserved a pedestal; 
this made him want to drag her down to his bed. To drag her down, 
were the words in his mind; they gave him a dark pleasure, the sense 
of a victory worth winning. 

He could not understand why — he thought it was an obscene con- 
flict, the sign of some secret depravity within him — why he felt, at 
the same time, a profound pride at the thought of granting to a 
woman the title of his wife. The feeling was solemn and shining; it 
was almost as if he felt that he wished to honor a woman by the act 
of possessing her. Lillian seemed to fit the image he had not known 
he held, had not known he wished to find; he saw the grace, the 
pride, the purity; the rest was in himself; he did not know that he 
was looking at a reflection. 

He remembered the day when Lillian carne from New York to his 
office, of her own sudden choice, and asked him to take her through 
his mills. He heard a soft, low, breathless tone— the tone of admira- 
tion — growing in her voice, as she questioned him about his work 
and looked at the place around her. He looked at her graceful figure 
moving against the bursts of furnace flame, and at the light swift 
steps of her high heels stumbling through drifts of slag, as she walked 
resolutely by his side. The look in her eyes, when she watched a 
heat of steel being poured, was like his own feeling for it made 
visible to him. When her eyes moved up to his face, he saw the same 
look, but intensified to a degree that seemed to make her helpless 
and silent. It was at dinner, that evening, that he asked her to 
marry him. 

It took him some time after his marriage before he admitted to 
himself that this was torture. He still remembered the flight when 
he admitted it, when he told himself — the veins of his i^rists pulled 
tight as he stood by the bed, looking down at Lillian — that he de- 
served the torture and that he would endure it. Lillian was not look- 
ing at him; she was adjusting her hair. “May I go to sleep now?" 
she asked. 

152 



She had never objected; she had never refused him anything; she 
submitted whenever he wished. She submitted in the manner of com- 
plying with the rule that it was, at times, her duty to become an 
inanimate object turned over to her husband’s use. 

She did not censure him. She made it clear that she took it for 
granted that men had degrading instincts which constituted the se- 
cret, ugly part of marriage. She was condescendingly tolerant She 
smiled, in amused distaste, at the intensity of what he experienced. 
"Its the most undignified pastime I know of,” she said to him once, 
“but 1 have never entertained the illusion that men are superior 
to animals.” 

His desire for her had died in the first week of their marriage. 
What remained was only a need which he was unable to destroy. 
He had never entered a whorehouse; he thought, at times, that the 
self-loathing he would experience there could be no worse than what 
he felt when he was driven to enter his wife’s bedroom. 

He would often find her reading a book. She would put it aside, 
with a white ribbon to mark the pages. When he lay exhausted, his 
eyes closed, still breathing in gasps, she would turn on the light, pick 
up the book and continue her reading. 

He told himself that he deserved the torture, because he had 
wished never to touch her again and was unable to maintain his 
decision. He despised himself for that. Vie despised a need which 
now held no shred of joy or meaning, which had become the mere 
need of a woman's body, an anonymous body that belonged to a 
woman whom he had to forget while he held it. He became con- 
vinced that the need was depravity. 

He did not condemn Lillian. He felt a dreary, indifferent respect 
tor her His hatred of his own desire had made him accept the doc- 
trine that women were pure and that a pure woman was one incapa- 
ble of physical pleasure. 

Through the quiet agony of the years of his marriage, there had 
been one thought which he would not permit himself to consider: 
the thought of infidelity. He had given his word. He intended to 
keep it. It was not loyalty to Lillian: it was not the person of Uilian 
that he wished to protect from dishonor — but the person of his wife. 

Vie thought of that now. standing at the window. He had not 
wanted to enter her room. He had fought against it. He had fought, 
more fiercely, against knowing the particular reason why he would 
not be able to withstand it tonight. Then, seeing her, he had known 
suddenly that he would not touch her. The reason which had driven 
him here tonight was the reason which made it impossible tor him. 

He stood still, feeling free of desire, feeling the bleak relief of 
indifference to his body, to this room, even to his presence here. He 
had turned away from her, not to see her lacquered chastity. What 
he thought he should feel was respect; what he felt was revulsion. 

. . but Dr. Pritchett said that our culture is dying because our 
universities have to depend on the alms of the meat packers, the 
steel puddlers and the purveyors of breakfast cereals.” 

Why had she married him? — he thought. That bright, crisp voice 
was not talking at random. She knew why he had come here. She 

153 



knew what it would do to him to see her pick up a silver buffer and 
go on talking gaily, polishing her fingernails. She was talking about 
the party. But she did not mention Bertram Scudder — or Dagny 
Taggart. 

What had she sought in marrying him? He felt the presence of 
some cold, driving purpose within her' — but found nothing to con- 
demn, She had never tried to use him. She made no demands on him. 

She found no satisfaction in the prestige of industrial power— she 
spurned it— she preferred her own circle of friends. She was not 
after money — she spent little — she was indifferent to the kind of 
extravagance he could have afforded. He had no right to accuse her, 
he thought, or ever to break the bond. She was a woman of honor 
in their marriage. She wanted nothing material from him. 

He turned and looked at her wearily. 

“Next time you give a party." he said, “stick to your own crowd. 
Don’t invite what you think are my friends. I don’t care to meet 
them socially." 

She laughed, startled and pleased. “I don't blame you, darling," 
she said. 

He walked out, adding nothing else. 

What did she want from him? — he thought. What was she after? 
In the universe as he knew U. there was no answer. 


Chapter VII THE EXPLOITERS AND THE EXPLOITED 

The rails rose through the rocks to the oil derricks and the oil der- 
ricks rose to the sky. Dagny stood on the bridge, looking up at the 
crest of the hill where the sun hit a spot of metal on the top of the 
highest rigging. It looked like a white torch lighted over the snow 
on the ridges of Wyatt Oil. 

By spring, she thought, the track would meet the line growing 
toward it from Cheyenne: She let her eyes follow the green-blue 
rails that started from the derricks, came down, went across the 
bridge and past her. She turned her head to follow them through 
the miles of dear air, as they went on in great curves hung on the 
sides of the mountains, far to the end of the new track, where a 
locomotive crane, like an arm of naked bones and nerves, moved 
tensely against the sky. 

A tractor went past her, loaded with green -blue bolts. The sound 
of drills came as a steady shudder from far below, where men swung 
on metal cables, cutting the straight stone drop of the canyon wall 
to reinforce the abutments of the bridge. Down the track, she could 
see men working, their arms stiff with the tension of their muscles 
as they gripped the handles of electric tie tampers. 

“Muscles. Miss Taggart," Ben Nealy, the contractor, ha$J said to 
her, “muscles— that’s ail it takes to build anything in the 4orId." 

No contractor equal to McNamara seemed to exist anywhere. She 
had taken the best she could find. No engineer on the Taggart staff 
could be trusted to supervise the job; all of them were l skeptical 
about the new metal. “Frankly, Miss T aggart," her chiefs engineer 

154 



had said, "since it is an experiment that nobody has ever attempted 
before, I do not think it's fair that it should be my responsibility/’ 
“lt*s mine,” she had answered. He was a man in his forties, who 
still preserved the breezy manner of the college from which he had 
graduated. Once, Taggart Transcontinental had had a chief engineer, 
a silent, gray-haired, self-educated man, who could not be matched 
on any railroad. He had resigned, five years ago. 

She glanced down over the bridge. She was standing on a slender 
beam of steel above a gorge that had cracked the mountains to a 
depth of filteen hundred feet. Far at the bottom, she could distin- 
guish the dim outlines of a dry river bed, of piled boulders, of trees 
contorted by centuries. She wondered whether boulders, tree trunks 
and muscles could ever bridge that canyon. She wondered why she 
found herself thinking suddenly that cave-dwellers had lived naked 
on the bottom of that canyon for ages. 

She looked up at the Wyatt oil fields. The track broke into sidings 
among the wells. She saw the small disks of switches dotted against 
(he snow. They were metal switches, of the kind that were scattered 
in thousands, unnoticed, throughout the country' — but these were 
sparkling in the sun and the sparks were greenish-blue. What they 
meant to her was hour upon hour of speaking quietly, evenly, pa- 
tiently, trying to hit the centerless target that w f as the person of Mr. 
Mowen, president of the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company, 
Inc , of Connecticut. “Rut, Miss Taggart, my dear Miss Taggart! My 
company has served your company for generations, why, your grand- 
father was the first customer of my grandfather, so you cannot doubt 
oui eagerness to do anything you ask, but — did you say switches 
made of Rearden Metal?” 

“Yes.” 

“But, Miss Taggart! Consider what it would mean, having to work 
with that metal. Do you know that the sluft won’t melt under less 
than four thousand. degrees? . .Great? Well, maybe that’s great for 
motor manufacturers, but what I'm thinking of is that it means a 
new type of furnace, a new process entirely, men to l>e trained, 
schedules upset, work rules shot, everything balled up and then God 
only knows whether it will come out right or not! . . . How do you 
know. Miss Taggart? How can you know, when it's never been done 
before? . . Weil, 1 can’t say that that metal is good and i can’t say 
that it isn’t. , . . Well, no, 1 can’t tell whether it’s a product of genius, 
as you say, or just another fraud as a great many people are saying, 
Miss Taggart, a great many. . . . Well, no, 1 can’t say that it does 
matter one way or the other, because who am I to take a chance on 
a job of this kind?” 

She had doubled the price of her order. Rearden had sent two 
metallurgists to train Mowen's men, to teach, to show, to explain 
every step of the process, and had paid the salaries of Mowen's men 
while they were being trained. 

She looked at the spikes in the rail at her feet. They meant the 
night when she had heard that Summit Casting of Illinois, the only 
company willing to make spikes of Rearden Metal, had gone bank- 
rupt, with half of her order undelivered. She had flown to Chicago, 

155 



that tiight, she had got three lawyers, a judge and a state legislator 
out of bed, she had bribed two of them and threatened the others, 
she had obtained a paper that was an emergency permit of a legality 
no one would ever be able to untangle, she had had the padlocked 
doors of the Summit Casting plant unlocked and a random, half- 
dressed crew working at the smelters before the windows had turned 
gray with daylight. The crews had remained at work, under a Taggart 
engineer and a Rearden metallurgist. The rebuilding of the Rio 
Norte Line was not held up. 

She listened to the sound of the drills. The work had been held 
up once, when the drilling for the bridge abutments was stopped. “I 
couldn't help it, Miss Taggart,” Ben Nealy had said, offended. “You 
know how fast drill heads wear out. 1 had them on order, but Incor- 
porated Tool ran into a little trouble, they couldn’t help it either. 
Associated Steel was delayed in delivering the steel to them, so 
there’s nothing we can do but wait. It’s no use getting upset. Miss 
Taggart. Fm doing my best.” 

“Fve hired you to do a job, not to do your best— -whatever that is.” 

“That’s a funny thing to say. That's an unpopular attitude. Miss 
Taggart, mighty unpopular.” 

“Forget Incorporated Tool. Forget the steel. Order the drill heads 
made of Rearden Metal.” 

“Not me. I’ve had enough trouble with the damn stuff in that rail 
of yours. Fm not going to mess up my own equipment.” 

“A drill head of Rearden Metal will outlast three of steel.” 

“Maybe.” 

“I said order them made.” 

“Who’s going to pay for it?” 

“I am.” 

“Who’s going to find somebody to make them?” 

She had telephoned Rearden. He had found an abandoned tool 
plant, long since out of business. Within an hour, he had purchased 
it from the relatives of its last owner. Within a day, the plant had 
been reopened. Within a week, drill heads of Rearden Metal had 
been delivered to the bridge in Colorado. 

She looked at the bridge. It represented a problem badly solved, 
but she had had to accept it. The bridge, twelve hundred feet of 
steel across the black gap, was built in the days of Nat Taggart’s 
son. It was long past the stage of safety; it had been patched with 
stringers of steel, then of iron, then of wood; it was barely worth the 
patching. She had thought of a new bridge of Rearden Metal. She 
had asked her chief engineer to submit a design and an estimate of 
the cost. The design he had submitted was the scheme of a steel 
bridge badly scaled down to the greater strength of the new metal; 
the cost made the project impossible to consider. 

“I beg your pardon. Miss Taggart,” he had said, offended. “I don’t 
know what you mean when you say that I haven’t made Lse of the 
metal. This design is an adaptation of the best bridges 4n record. 
What else did you expect?” 

“A new method of construction.” 

“What do you mean, a new method? ’ 

156 



“I mean that when men got structural steel, they did not use it to 
build steel copies of wooden bridges.” She had added wearily, “Get 
me an estimate on what well need to make our old bridge last for 
another five years.” 

“Yes, Miss Taggart,” he had said cheerfully. “If we reinforce it 
with steel-*” 

“Well reinforce it with Rcarden Metal.” 

“Yes, Miss Taggart,” he had said coldly. 

She looked at the snow-covered mountains. Her job had seemed 
hard at times, in New York. She had stopped for blank moments in 
the middle of her office, paralyzed by despair at the rigidity of time 
which she could not stretch any further — on a day when urgent ap- 
pointments had succeeded one another, when she had discussed worn 
Diesels, rotting freight cars, failing signal systems, falling revenues, 
while thinking of the latest emergency on the Rio Norte construction; 
when she had talked, with the vision of two streaks of green-blue 
metal cutting across her mind: when she had interrupted the discus- 
sions, realizing suddenly why a certain news item had disturbed her. 
and seized the telephone receiver to call long-distance, to call her 
contractor, to say, “Where do you gel the food from, for your 
men? ... I thought so. Well, Barton and Jones of Denver went 
bankrupt yesterday. Bettei find another supplier at once, if you don’t 
want to have a famine on your hands.” She had been building the 
line from her desk in New York. It had seemed hard. But now she 
was looking at the track. It was growing. It would be done on time. 

She heard sharp, hurried footsteps and turned. A man was coming 
up the track He was tall and young, his head of black hair was 
hatless in the cold wind, he wore a workman's leather jacket, but he 
did not look like a workman, there was (cm imperious an assurance 
in the way he walked. She could not recognize the face until he came 
closer. It was Ellis Wyatt. She had not seen him since that one 
interview in her office. 

He approached, stopped, looked at her and smiled 

“Hello, Dagny,” he said. 

In a single shock of emotion, she knew everything the two words 
were intended to tell her. It was forgiveness, understanding, acknowl- 
edgment, It was a salute. 

She laughed, like a child, in happiness that things should be as 
right as that. 

“Hello.” she said, extending her hand, 

His hand held hers an instant longer than a greeting required. It 
was their signature under a score settled and understood. 

‘ Tell Nealy to put up new snow fences for a mile and a half on 
Granada Pass,” he said. “The old ones are rotted. They won’t stand 
through another storm. Send him a rotary plow. What he’s got is a 
piece of junk that wouldn’t sweep a back yard. The big snows are 
coming any day now.” 

She considered him for a moment. “How often have you been 
doing this?” she asked. 

.“What?” 

“Coming to watch the work.” 

157 



“Every now and then. When I have time. Why?" 

‘"Were you here the night when they had the rock slide?” 

“Yes.” 

“I was surprised how quickly and well they cleared the track, when 
I got the reports about it. It made me think that Nealy was a belter 
man than I had thought.” 

u He isn't.” 

“Was it you who organized the system of moving his day’s supplies 
down to the line?” 

“Sure. His men used to spend half their time hunting for things. 
Tell him to watch his water tanks. They’ll free/e on him one of these 
nights. See if you can get him a new ditcher. I don’t like the looks 
of the one he’s got. Check on his wiring system.” 

She looked at him for a moment. “Thanks, Ellis.” she said. 

He smiled and walked on. She watched him as he walked across 
the bridge, as he started up the long rise toward his derricks. 

“He thinks he owns the place, doesn’t he?” 

She turned, startled. Ben Nealy had approached her: his thumb 
was pointing at Ellis Wyatt. 

“What place?” 

“The railroad. Miss Taggart. Your railroad. Or the whole world 
maybe. That's what he thinks.” 

Ben Nealy was a bulky man with a soft, sullen face. His eyes were 
stubborn and blank. In the bluish light of the snow, his skin had the 
tinge of butter. 

“What does he keep hanging around here lor?” he said. “As if 
nobody knew their business hut him I he snooty show-oft. Who does 
he think he is?” 

“God damn you.” said Dagny evenly, not raising her voice. 

Nealy could' never know what had made her say it. But some part 
of him, in some way of his own, knew it: the shocking thing to her 
was that he was not shocked. He said nothing. 

“Let's go, to your quarters,” she said wearily, pointing to an old 
railway coach on a spur in the distance. “Have somebody there to 
take notes.” 

“Now about those crossties. Miss Taggart.” he said hastily as they 
started. “Mr Coleman of your office okayed them. He didn't say 
anything about too much bark. I don’t see why you think they’re — ” 

“1 said you’re going to replace them.” 

When she came out of the coach, exhausted by two hours of effort 
to be patient, to instruct, to explain —she saw an automobile parked 
on the torn dirt road below, a black two-seater, sparkling and new. 
A new car was an astonishing sight anywhere; one did not see 
them often. 

She glanced around and gasped at the sight of the tall figure stand- 
ing at the foot of the bridge. It was Hank Rcarden; stye had not 
expected to find him in Colorado. He seemed absorbed calcula- 
tions, pencil and notebook in hand. His clothes attracted! attention, 
like his car and for the same reason; he wore a simple ftrenchcoat 
and a hat with a slanting brim, but they were of such gtibd quality, 
so flagrantly expensive that they appeared ostentatious jkmong the 

158 



seedy garments of the crowds everywhere, the more ostentatious 
because worn so naturally. 

She noticed suddenly that she was running toward him; she had 
lost all trace of exhaustion, 'Fhen she remembered that she had not 
seen him since the party. She stopped. 

He saw her, he waved to her in a gesture of pleased, astonished 
greeting, and he walked forward to meet her. He was smiling. 

■'Hello, ” he said. "Your first trip to the job?” 

“My fifth, in three months.” 

"I didn’t know you were here. Nobody told me.” 

"I thought you’d break down some day.” 

“Break down?” 

"Enough to come and see this, There’s your Metal. How do you 
like it?” 

He glanced around. ‘If you ever decide to quit the railroad busi- 
ness, let me know.” 

“You’d give me a job?” 

“Any time.” 

She looked at him for a moment. “You’re only half-kidding. Hank. 

I think you’d like it having me ask you for a job. Having me for an 
employee instead of a customer. Giving me orders to obey.” 

"Yes. I would.” 

She said, her face hard, "Don’t quit the steel business, f won’t 
promise you a job on the raihoad.” 

He laughed. “Don’t trv it.” 

“What?” 

“To win any battle when l set the terms.” 

She did not answer. She was struck by what the words made her 
feel; it was not an emotion, but a physical sensation of pleasure, 
which she could not name or understand. 

“Incidentally,” he said, “this is not my first trip. 1 was here 
yesterday.” 

“You were? Why?” 

“Oh, I came to Colorado on some business of my own, so 1 
thought I’d lake a look at this.” 

"What arc you after?” 

“Why do you assume that I'm after anything?” 

“You wouldn’t waste time coming here just to look. Not twice.” 
He laughed. "True.” He pointed at the bridge. "I’m after that.” 

“What about it?” 

"It's ready for the scrap heap." 

“Do you suppose that I don’t know it?” 

“I saw the specifications of your order for Rearden Metal members 
for that bridge. You’re wasting your money. The difference between 
what you're planning to spend on a makeshift that will last a couple 
of years, and the cost of a new Rearden Metal bridge, is compara- 
tively so little that I don’t see why you want to bother preserving 
this museum piece.” 

"I’ve thought of a new Rearden Metal bridge. I’ve had my engi- 
neers give me an estimate.” 

"What did they tell you?” 


159 



“Two million dollars. 1 ’ 

"‘Good God!” 

“What would you say?” 

“Eight hundred thousand.” 

She looked at him. She knew that he never spoke idly. She asked, 
trying to sound calm, “How?” 

“Like this.” 

He showed her his notebook. She saw the disjoined notations he 
had made, a great many figures, a few rough sketches. She under- 
stood his scheme before he had finished explaining it. She did not 
notice that they had sat down, that they were sitting on a pile of 
frozen lumber, that her legs were pressed to the rough planks and 
she could feel the cold through her thin stockings. They were bent 
together over a few scraps of paper which could make it possible 
for thousands of tons of freight to cross a cut of empty space. His 
voice sounded sharp and clear, while he explained thrusts, pulls, 
loads, wind pressures. The bridge was to be a single twelve-hundred- 
foot -truss span. He had devised a new type of truss. It had never 
been made before and could not be made except with members that 
had the strength and the lightness ot Kearden Metal. 

“Hank,” she asked, “did you invent this in two days?” 

“Hell. no. 1 ‘invented’ it long before I had Reardon Metal. 1 fig- 
ured it out while making steel for bridges. I wanted a metal with 
which one would be able to do this, among other things. 1 came here 
just to see your particular problem for myself.” 

He chuckled, when he saw the slow movement of her hand across 
her eyes and the line of bitterness in the set of her mouth, as if she 
were trying to wipe out the things against which she had fought such 
an exhausting, .cheerless battle. 

“This is only a rough scheme,” he said, “but i believe you see 
what can be done?” 

“I can’t tell you all that 1 see, Hank.” 

“Don’t bother. I know it.” 

“You’re saving Taggart Transcontinental for the second time.” 

“You used to be a better psychologist than that.” 

“What do you mean'*” 

“Why should 1 give a damn about saving Taggart Transcontinen- 
tal? Don’t you know that 1 want to have a bridge of Rearden Metal 
to show the country?” 

“Yes, Hank. 1 know it.” 

“There are too many people yelping that rails of Rearden Metal 
are unsafe. So I thought I’d give them something real to yelp about. 
Let them see a bridge of Rearden Metal.” 

She looked at him and laughed aloud in simple delight. 

“Now what’s that?” he asked. 

“Hank, I don’t know anyone, not anyone in the world, wfio’d think 
of such an answer to people, in such circumstances — except you.” 

“What about you? Would you want to make the answd with me 
and face the same screaming?” 

“You knew 1 would ” 

“Yes. I knew it.” 


160 



He glanced at her, his eyes narrowed; he did not laugh as she had, 
hut the glance was an equivalent. 

She remembered suddenly their last meeting, at the party* The 
memory seemed incredible. Their ease with each other — the strange, 
light-headed feeling, which included the knowledge that it was the 
only sense of ease cither of them found anywhere --made the thought 
of hostility impossible. Yet she knew that the party had taken place; 
ho acted as if it had not. 

They walked to the edge of the canyon. Together, they looked at 
the dark drop, at the rise of rock beyond it, at the sun high on the 
derricks of Wyatt Oil. She stood, her feet apart on the frozen stones, 
braced firmly against the wind. She could feel, without touching it, 
the line of his chest behind her shoulder. The wind beat her coat 
against his legs. 

“Hank, do you think we can build it in time? There arc only six 
months left.” 

“Sure. It will take less time and labor than any other type of 
bridge. Let me have my engineers work out the basic scheme and 
submit it to you. No obligation on your part. Just lake a look at it 
and see for yourself whether you*!! be able to afford it. You will. 
Then you can let your college boys work out the details.” 

“What about the Metal?” 

“[’11 get the Metal rolled if l have to throw every other order out 
of the mills.” 

“You’ll get it rolled on so short a notice?” 

“Have 1 ever held you up on an order?” 

“No. But the way things are going nowadays, you might not be 
able to help it.” 

“Who do you think you’re talking to — Orren Boyle?” 

She laughed. “All right. Let me have the drawings as soon as 
possible. I’ll take a look and let you know within forty-eight hours. 
As to my college boys, they- -” She stopped, frowning. “Hank, why 
is it so hard to lind good men for any job nowadays?” 

“I don't know . . .” 

He looked at the lines of the mountains cut across the sky. A thin 
jet of smoke was rising from a distant valley. 

“Have you seen the new towns of Colorado and the factories?” 
he asked. 

“Yes.” 

“It’s great, isn’t it? — to see the kind of men they’ve gathered here 
fiom every corner of the country. All of them young, all of them 
starting on a shoestring and moving mountains.” 

“What mountain have you decided to move?” 

“Why?” 

“What are you doing in Colorado?” 

He smiled. “Looking at a mining property.” 

“What sort?” 

“Copper.” 

“Good God, don't you have enough to do?” 

“1 know it’s a complicated job. But the supply of copper is becom- 
ing completely unreliable. There doesn't seem to be a single first- 

161 



rate company left in the business in this country — and I don’t want 
to deal with d’Anconia Copper. 1 don't trust that playboy.” 

“I don’t blame you.” she said, looking away . 

“So if there’s no competent person left to do it. I’ll have to mine 
my own copper, as 1 mine my own iron ore. 1 can’t take any chances 
on being held up by all those failures and shortages. 1 need a great 
deal of copper for Rearden Metal/’ 

“Have you bought the mine?” 

“Not yet. There are a few problems to solve. Getting the men, 
the equipment, the transportation.” 

“Oh , . . !” She chuckled. ’’Going to speak to me about building 
a branch line?” 

“Might. There’s no limit to what’s possible in this state. Do you 
know that they have every kind of natural resource here, waiting, 
untouched? And the way their factories are growing! 1 feci ten years 
younger when 1 come here.” 

“I don't.” She was looking cast, past the mountains. “1 think of 
the contrast, all over the rest of the Taggart system. There’s less to 
carry, less tonnage produced each year. It's as if . . . Hank, what’s 
wrong with the country?” 

“1 don’t know.” 

“1 keep thinking of what they told us in school about the sun losing 
energy, growing colder each year. I remember wondering, then, what 
it would be like in the last days of the world. I think it would be . . . 
like this. Growing colder and things stopping.” 

“I never believed that story. I thought bv the time the sun was 
exhausted, men would find a substitute ” 

“You did? Funny. I thought that, loo.” 

He pointed at the column of smoke. ‘There’s your new sunrise. 
It's going to feed the rest.” 

“If it's not stopped.” 

“Do you think it can be stopped?” 

She looked at the rail under her feet. “No,” she said. 

He smiled. He looked down at the rail, then let his eyes move 
along the track, up the sides of the mountains, to the distant crane. 
She saw two things, as if, for a moment, the two stood alone in her 
field of vision: the lines of his profile and the green-blue cord coiling 
through space. 

“We’ve done it, haven’t we?” he said. 

In payment for every effort, for every sleepless night, for every 
silent thrust against despair, this moment was all she wanted. “Yes. 
We have.” 

She looked away, noticed an old crane on a siding, and thought 
that its cables were worn and would need replacing. Thi$ was the 
great clarity of being beyond emotion, after the reward pi having 
felt everything one could feel. Their achievement, she thought, and 
one moment of acknowledging it, of possessing it together — what 
greater intimacy could one share? Now she was free for thfc simplest, 
most commonplace concerns of the moment, because nothing could 
be meaningless within her sight. 

She wondered what made her certain that he felt as did- He 

162 



turned abruptly and started toward his car. She followed. They did 
not look at each other. 

“Em due to leave for the East in an hour,” he said. 

She pointed at the car. “Where did you get that?” 

“Here. It's a Hammond, Hammond of Colorado — they’re the only 
people who’re still making a good car. I just bought it, on this trip.” 

“Wonderful job.” 

“Yes, isn't it?” 

“Going to drive it back to New York?” 

“No, I’m having it shipped, 1 flew my plane down here.” 

“Oh, you did? 1 drove down from Cheyenne — 1 had to see the 
line “but I’m anxious to get home as last as possible. Would you 
take me along? ('an 1 fly back with you?” 

He did not answer at once. .She noticed the empty moment of a 
pause. “I’m sorry,” he said; she wondered whether she imagined the 
note of abruptness in his voice. “Tm nol flying back to New York. 
I’m going to Minnesota.” 

“Oh well, then i’ll try to get on an air liner, if I can find one 
today.” 

She watched his car vanish down the winding road. She drove to 
the airport an houi later. The place was a small field at the bottom 
of a break in the desolate chain of mountains. There were patches 
of snow on the hatd, pitted earth The pole of a beacon stood at 
one side, trailing wires to the ground; the other poles had been 
knocked down by a storm. 

A lonely attendant came to meet her. “No, Miss Taggart.” he 
sanl regretfully, “no planes till day after tomorrow. There’s only one 
transcontinental liner every two days, you know, and the one that 
w'as due today has been grounded, down in Arizona. Engine trouble, 
as usual.” lie added. “It’s a pity you didn't get here a bit sooner* 
Mr. Reardon took off for New York, in his private plane, just a little 
while ago.” 

“He wasn't flying to Nonv York, was he?” 

“Why. yes. He said so ” 

“Are you sure?” 

“He said he had an appointment there tonight.” 

She looked at the sky to the east, blankly, without moving. She 
had no due to any reason, nothing to give her a foothold, nothing 
with which to weigh this or light it or understand. 

* * 

“Damn these streets!” said James Taggart. “We’re going to be 
late.” 

Dagny glanced ahead, past the back of the chauffeur. Through the 
circle made by a windshield wiper on the sleet ^streaked glass, she 
saw black, worn, glistening car tops strung in a motionless line. Far 
ahead, the smear of a red lantern, low over the ground, marked a 
street excavation. 

“There’s something wrong on every other street,” said Taggart 
irritably. “Why doesn’t somebody fix them?” 

She leaned back against the seat* tightening the collar of her wrap. 
She felt exhausted at the end of a day she had started at her desk, 

m 



in her office^ at seven am; a day she had broken off, uncompleted, 
to rush home and dress, because she had promised Jim to speak at 
the dinner of the New York Business Council, “They want us to 
give them a talk about Rearden Metal,” he had said. “You can do 
it so much better than 1. It's very important that we present a good 
case. There’s such a controversy about Rearden Metal.” 

Sitting beside him in his car, she regretted that she had agreed. 
She looked at the streets of New York and thought of the race 
between metal and time, between the rails of the Rio Norte Line 
and the passing days. She felt as if her nerves were being pulled 
tight by the stillness of the car, by the guilt of wasting an evening 
when she could not afford to waste an hour. 

“With all those attacks on Rearden that one hears everywhere,” 
said Taggart, “he might need a few friends,” 

She glanced at him incredulously “You mean you want to stand 
by him?” 

He did not answer at once; he asked, his voice bleak. “That report 
of the special committee of the National Council of Metal Indus- 
tries — what do you think of it?” 

“You know what I think of it.” 

“They said Rearden Metal is a threat to public safety. They said 
its chemical composition is unsound, it's brittle, it's decomposing 
molecularly, and it will crack suddenly, without warning . . .” He 
stopped, as if begging for an answer. .She did not answer. He asked 
anxiously, “You haven’t changed your mind about it. have you?” 

“About what?” 

“About that metal.” 

“No, Jim. I have not changed my mind ” 

“They’re experts, though ... the men on that committee ... Top 
experts . . . Chief metallurgists for the biggest corporations, with a 
string of degrees from universities all river the country. . - He said 
it unhappily, as if he were begging her to make him doubt these 
men and their verdict. 

She watched him. puzzled; this was not like him. 

The car jerked forward. It moved slow ly through a gap m a plank 
barrier, past the hole of a broken water main. She saw the new 
pipe stacked by the excavation; the pipe bore a trademark; Stockton 
Foundry, Colorado. She looked away; she wished she were not re- 
minded of Colorado. 

“I can’t understand it . . said Taggart miserably. “The top ex- 
perts of the National Council of Metal Industries . . .” 

“Who’s the president of the National Council of Metal Industries, 
Jim? Orren Boyle, isn’t it?” 

Taggart did not turn to her, but his jaw snapped ope£. “If that 
fat slob thinks he can — ” he started, but stopped and did (not finish. 

She looked up at a street lamp on the corner. It was pi globe of 
glass filled with light. It hung, secure from storm, lighting boarded 
windows and cracked sidewalks, as their only guardian. t the end 
of the street, across the river, against the glow of a factory, she saw 
the thin tracing of a power station. A truck went by, hiding her view. 
It was the kind of truck that fed the power station — a tank truck, 

164 



its bright new paint impervious to sleet, green with white letters; 
Wyatt Oil Colorado. 

u Dagny, have you heard about that discussion at the structural 
steel workers’ union meeting in Detroit?” 

“No. What discussion?” 

“It was in all the newspapers, lliey debated whether their mem- 
bers should or should not be permitted to work with Rearden Metal. 
They didn’t reach a decision, but that was enough for the contractor 
who was going to take a chance on Rearden Metal. He cancelled 
his order, but fast! . . . What if . . . what if everybody decides 
against it?” 

“Let them.” 

A dot of light was rising in a straight hne to the top of an invisible 
tower. It was the elevator of a great hotel. The car went past the 
building’s alley. Men were moving a heavy, crated piece of equip- 
ment from a truck into the basement She saw the name on the 
crate: Nielsen Motors. Colorado. 

“I don’t like that resolution passed by the convention ot the grade 
school teachers of New Mexico.” said Taggart. 

“What resolution?” 

“They resolved that it was their opinion that children should not 
be permitted to ride on the new Rio Norte Line of Taggart Transcon- 
tinental when it’s completed, because it is unsafe . They said it 
specifically, the new line of faggan Vuwsconunvntal It was m all 
iho newspapers. It’s terrible publicity tor us. . . Dagny, what do 
vou think we should do to answer them 9 ” 

“Run the first train on the new Rio Norte I inc." 

He lemamed silent for a long time He looked strangely dejected. 
She could not understand it: he did not gloat, he did not use the 
opinions of his favorite authorities against her. he seemed to be 
pleading for reassurance. 

A car flashed past them; she had a moment's glimpse of power — 
a smooth, confident motion and a shining body. She knew the make 
of the car: Hammond, Colorado 

“Dagny. are we . . . are we going to have that line built . . . 
on time?” 

It was strange to hear a note of plain emotion in his voice, the 
uncomplicated sound of animal fear. 

“God help this city, if we don’t!” she answered. 

The car turned a cornei . Above the black roofs of the city, she 
saw' the page of the calendar, hit by the white glare of a spotlight. 
It said: January 

“Dan Conway is a bastard!” 

The words broke out suddenly, as if he could not hold them any 
longer. 

She looked at him, bewildered “Why?" 

"He refused to sell us the Colorado track of the Phoenix* 
Durango." 

“You didn’t — ” She had to stop. She started again, keeping her 
voice flat in order not to scream. “You haven’t approached him 
about it?” 


165 



‘'Of course I have!” 

"You didn’t expect him . . , to sell it ... to yauT* 

“Why not?” His hysterically belligerent manner was back. ”1 of- 
fered him more than anybody else did. We wouldn’t have had the 
expense of tearing it up and caning it off, we could have used it as 
is. And it would have been wonderful publicity for us — that we re 
giving up the Rearden Metal track in deference to public opinion, 
ft would have been worth every penny of it in good will! But the 
son of a bitch refused. He's actually declared that not a foot of rail 
would be sold to Taggart Transcontinental. He’s selling it piecemeal 
to any stray comer, to one-horse railroads in Arkansas or North 
Dakota, selling it at a loss, way under what l offered him. the bas- 
tard! Doesn’t even want to take a profit! And you should see those 
vultures flocking to him! They know they'd never have a chance to 
get rail anywhere else!” 

She sat. her head bowed. She could not bear to look at him. 

‘i think it’s contrary to the intent ol the Anti-dog-cat’ dog Rule,” 
he said angrily. “J think it was the intent and purpose of the National 
Alliance of Railroads to protect the essential systems, not the jerk- 
waters of North Dakota. But 1 can't get the Alliance to vote on it 
now, because they're all down there, outbidding one anothei tor 
that rail!” 

She said slowly, as if she wished it were possible to wear gloves 
to handle the words. ”1 see why you want me to defend Rearden 
Metal.” 

“I don't know what you’re—” 

“Shut up. Jim,” she said quietly. 

He remained silent for a moment Then he drew his head back 
and drawled defiantly, “You'd better do a good job of defending 
Rearden Metal, because Bertram Scudder can gel pietty sarcastic.” 

“Bertram Scudder ’” 

“He's going to be one of the speakers tonight *' 

“One of the . . . You didn't tel! me there were to be other 
speakers.” 

“Well . . . 1 . . What difference does that make? You're not 
afraid of him. are you*’” 

“The New York Biisinvss Council . . . and you invite Bertram 
Scudder?” 

“Why not? Don’t you think it’s smart? He doesn’t have any hard 
feelings toward businessmen, not really. He's accepted the invitation. 
We want to be broad-minded and hear all sides and maybe win him 
over. . . . Well, what are you staring at? You'll be able to beat him. 
won’t you?” 

”... to beat him?” 

“On the air. U’s going to be a radio broadcast. You’ief going to 
debate with him the question: ‘Is Rearden Metal a lethijtt product 
of greed?’ ” 

She leaned forward. She pulled open the glass partitfm of the 
front .scat, ordering, “Stop the car!” 

She did not hear what Taggart was saying. She noticed dimly that 
his voice rose to screams: “They’re waiting! . . . Five hundired people 

166 



at the dinner, and a national hook-up! . . , You can't do this to me!” 
He seized her arm, screaming, “But why?” 

“You goddamn fool, do you think I consider their question 
debatable?” 

The car stopped, she leaped out and ran. 

The first thing she noticed after a while, was her slippers. She was 
walking slowly, normally, and it was strange to feel iced stone under 
the thin soles of black satin sandals. She pushed her hair back, off 
her forehead, and felt drops of sleet melting on her palm. 

She was quiet now; the blinding anger was gone; she felt nothing 
but a gray weariness. Her head ached a little, she realized that 
she was hungry and remembered that she was to have had dinner 
at the Business Council. She walked on. She did not want to eat. 
She thought she would get a cup of coffee somewhere, then take a 
cab home. 

She glanced around her. There were no cabs in sight. She did not 
know the neighborhood. It did not seem to be a good one. She saw 
an empty stretch of space across the street, an abandoned park encir- 
cled by a jagged line that began as distant skyscrapers and came 
down to factory chimneys; she saw a few lights in the windows of 
dilapidated houses, a few small, grimy shops closed for the night, 
and the fog of the East River two blocks away. 

She started back toward the center of the city. The black shape 
of a rum rose before her. It had been an office building, long ago; 
she saw the sky through the naked steel skeleton and the angular 
remnants ol the bricks that had crumbled. In the shadow of the ruin, 
like a blade of grass fighting to live at the roots ol a dead giant, 
there stood a small diner. Its windows were a bright band of glass 
and light. She went in 

There was a clean counter inside, with a shining strip of chromium 
at the edges. There was a bnght metal boiler and the odor of coffee. 
A few derelicts sat at the counter, a husky, elderly man slotKl behind 
it, the sleeves of his clean white shin rolled at the elbows. The warm 
air made her realize, in simple gratitude, that she had been cold. 
She pulled her black velvet cape tight about her and sat down at 
the counter. 

“A cup of coffee, please,” she said. 

The men looked at her without curiosity. They did not seem aston- 
ished to see a woman in evening clothes enter a slum diner; nothing 
astonished anyone, these days. Flic owner turned impassively to fill 
her older; there was, in his stolid indifference, the kind of merci- 
fulness that asks no questions. 

She could not tell whether the four at the counter were beggars 
or working men; neither clothes nor manner showed the difference, 
these days. The owner placed a mug of coffee before her. She dosed 
both hands about it, finding enjoyment in its warmth. 

- She glanced around her and thought, in habitual professional cal- 
culation, how wonderful it was that one amid buy so much for a 
dime. Her eyes moved from the stainless steel cylinder of the coffee 
boiler to the cast-iron griddle, to the glass shelves, to the enameled 
sink, to the chromium blades of a mixer. The owner was making 

167 



toast: She found pleasure in watching the ingenuity of an opeit belt 
that moved slowly, carrying slices of bread past glowing electric coils. 
Then she saw the name stamped on the toaster: Marsh, Colorado. 

Her head fell down on her arm on the counter. 

“It’s no use, lady,’* said the old bum beside her. 

She had to raise her head. She had to smile in amusement, at him 
and at herself. 

“It isn’t?” she asked. 

“No. Forget it. You're only fooling yourself.” 

“About what?” 

“About anything being worth a damn. It’s dust, lady, all of it, dust 
and blood. Don’t believe the dreams they pump you full of, and you 
won't get hurt.” 

“What dreams?” 

“The stories they tell you when you’re young — about the human 
spirit. There isn’t any human spirit. Man is just a low-grade animal, 
without intellect, without soul, without virtues or moral values. An 
animal with only two capacities: to eat and to reproduce.” 

His gaunt face, with staring eyes and shrunken features that had 
been delicate, still retained a trace of distinction. He looked like the 
hulk of an evangelist or a professor of esthetics who had spent years 
in contemplation in obscure museums. She wondered what had de- 
stroyed him, what error on the way could bring a man to this. 

“You go through life looking for beauty, for greatness, for some 
sublime achievement,” he said. ‘And what do you find? A lot of 
trick machinery for making upholstered cars -or inner-spring mat- 
tresses.” 

“What’s wrong with inner-spring mattresses?” said a man who 
looked like a truck driver. ‘Don’t mind him, lady. He likes to hear 
himself talk. He don’t mean no harm.” 

“Man's only talent is an ignoble cunning for satisfying the needs 
of his body,*’ said the old bum. “No intelligence is required for that. 
Don’t believe the stories about man’s mind, his spirit, his ideals, his 
sense of unlimited ambition.” 

“1 don’t,” said a young boy who sat at the end of the counter. He 
wore a coat ripped across one shoulder; his square-shaped mouth 
seemed formed by the bitterness of a lifetime. 

“Spirit?” said the old bum. “There’s no spirit involved in manufac- 
turing or in sex. Yet these are man s only concerns. Matter — that’s 
all men know or care about. As witness our great industries — the 
only accomplishment of our alleged civilization — built by vulgar ma- 
terialists with the aims, the interests and the moral sense of hogs. It 
doesn’t take any morality to turn out a ten-ton truck on; an assem- 
bly line.” 

“What is morality?” she asked. 

“Judgment to distinguish right and wrong, vision to $e4 the truth, 
courage to act upon it, dedication to that which is good, integrity to 
stand by the good at any price. But where docs one tin<I it?” 

The young boy made a sound that was half-chuckle, * half-sneer: 
“Who is John Galt?” 


168 



She drank the coffee, concerned with nothing but the pleasure of 
feeling as if the hot liquid were reviving the aneries o( her body, 

“I can tell you/ 7 said a small, shriveled tramp who wore a cap 
pulled low over his eyes. “I know.” 

Nobody heard him or paid any attention. The young boy was 
watching Dagny with a kind of fierce, purposeless intensity, 

•‘You're not afraid,” he said to her suddenly, without explanation, 
a flat statement in a brusque, lifeless voice that had a note of wonder. 

She looked at him, “No,” she said, 4 Tm not.” 

“1 know who is John Gall,” said the tramp. “It’s a secret, but 1 
know it.” 

“Who?” she asked without interest. 

“An explorer,” said the tramp. “The greatest explorer that ever 
lived. The man who found the fountain of youth.” 

“Give me another cup. Black,” said the old bum. pushing his cup 
across the counter. 

“John Galt spent years looking for it. He crossed oceans, and he 
crossed deserts, and he went down into forgotten mines, miles under 
the earth. But he found it on the top ot a mountain. It took him ten 
years to climb that mountain. It broke every bone in his body, it 
tore the skin oft his hands, it made him lose his home, his name, his 
love. But he climbed it. He found the fountain of youth, which he 
wanted to bring down to men. Only he never came back.” 

“Why didn’t he?” she asked. 

“Because he found that it couldn’t be brought down.” 

* * 

The man who sat in trout of Reurden’s desk had vague features 
and a manner devoid of all emphasis, so that one could farm no 
specific image of his face nor detect the driving motive of his person. 
His only mark of distinction seemed to be a bulbous nose, a bit too 
large for the rest of him: his manner was meek, but it conveyed a 
preposterous hint, the hint of a threat deliberately kept furtive, yet 
intended to be recognized. Reardon could not understand the pur- 
pose of his visit. He was Dr. Pottei. who hold some undefined posi- 
tion with the Slate Science Institute. 

“What do you want?” Rearden asked for the third time. 

“It is the social aspect that l am asking you to consider, Mr. Rear- 
den,” the man said softly. “1 urge you to take note of the age we're 
living in. Our economy is not ready for it.” 

“For what?” 

“Our economy is in a state of extremely precarious equilibrium, 
Wc all have to pool our efforts to save it from collapse.” 

“Well, what is it you want me to do?” 

“These are the considerations which I was asked to call to your 
attention, I am from the State Science Institute, Mr. Rearden/ 7 

“You’ve said so before. But what did you wish to see me about?” 

“The State Science Institute does not hold a favorable opinion of 
Rearden Metal/ 7 

“You've said that, too/ 7 

“Isn't that a factor which you must take into consideration?" 

“No/ 7 


169 



The light was growing dim in the broad windows of the office. 
The days were short. Rearden saw the irregular shadow of the nose 
on the man's cheek, and the pale eyes watching him; the glance was 
vague, but its direction purposeful. 

“The State Science Institute represents the best brains of the coun- 
try, Mr. Rearden.’' 

“So I’m told." 

“Surety you do not want to pit your own judgment against theirs?” 

*‘I do.” 

The man looked at Rearden as if pleading for help, as if Rearden 
had broken an unwritten code svhich demanded that he should have 
understood long ago. Rearden offered no help. 

“h this all you wanted to know ?” he asked. 

“It's only a question of time, Mr. Rearden,” the man said placat- 
ingly. “Just a temporary delay. Just to give our economy a chance 
to get stabilized. If you’d only wait for a couple of years — ” 

Rearden chuckled, gaily, contemptuously. “So that's what you’re 
after? Want me to take Rearden Metal off the market? Why?” 

“Only for a few years. Mr. Rearden. Only until — ” 

“Look,” said Rearden. “Now I'll ask you a question: did your 
scientists decide that Rearden Metal is not what I claim it is?” 

“We have not committed ourselves as to that.” 

“Did they decide it’s no good?” 

“It is the social impact of a product that must be considered. Wc 
are thinking in terms of the country as a whole, we are concerned 
with the public welfare and the terrible crisis of the present moment, 
which — ” 

“Is Rearden Metal good or not?” 

“If we view -the picture from the angle of the alarming growth of 
unemployment; which at present — ” 

“Is Rearden Metal good?” 

“At a lime of desperate steel shortage, we cannot afford to permit 
the expansion of a steel company which produces too much, because 
it might throw out of business the companies which produce too 
little, thus creating an unbalanced economy which — ” 

“Are you going to answer my question?” 

The man shrugged. “Questions of value are relative. If Rearden 
Metal is not good, it's a physical danger to the public. If it is good 
it’s a social danger.” 

“If you have anything to say to me about the physical danger 
of Rearden Metal, say it. Drop the rest of it. Fast. I don't speak 
that language.” 

“But surely questions of social welfare — ” 

“Drop it.” 

The man looked bewildered and lost, as if the grounti had been 
cut from under his feet. In a moment, he asked helplessly, “But 
what, then, is your chief concern?” 

“The market.” 

“How do you mean?” 

“There’s a market for Rearden Metal and l intend fo take full 
advantage of it.” 


170 



“Isn’t the market somewhat hypothetical? The public response to 
your metal has not been encouraging. Except for the order from 
Taggart Transcontinental, you haven’t obtained any major—” 

“Well, then, if you think the public won’t go for it, what are you 
worrying about?” 

“If the public doesn’t go for it, you will take a heavy loss, *Mr. 
Rearden.” 

‘That’s my worry, not yours.” 

“Whereas, if you adopt a more co-operative attitude and agree to 
wait for a few years — ” 

“Why should 1 wait?” 

“But I believe I have made it dear that the State Science Institute 
does not approve of the appearance of Rearden Metal on the metal- 
lurgical scene at the present time.” 

“Why should 1 give a damn about that?” 

The man sighed. “You are a very difficult man, Mr Rearden,” 
The sky of the late afternoon was growing heavy, as if thickening 
against the glass of the windowpanes. The outlines of the man's 
figure seemed to dissolve into a blob among the sharp, straight planes 
of the furniture. 

“I gave you this appointment,' ” said Rearden, "because you told 
me that you wished to discuss something ot extreme importance. If 
this is all you had to say, you will please excuse me now. I am 
very busy.*’ 

Hie man settled back in his chair, T believe you have spent ten 
years of research on Rearden Metal.” he said. “How* much has it 
cost you?” 

Rearden glanced up- he could not understand the drift of the ques- 
tion, yet there was an undisguised purposefulness in the man’s voice; 
the voice had hardened. 

“One and a half million dollars,” said Rearden. 

“How much w»U you take for it?” 

Rearden had to let a moment pass He could not believe it. “For 
what?” he asked, his voice low 
“For all rights to Rearden Metal “ 

T think you had better get out ot here,” said Rearden. 

“ t here is no call tor such an attitude You are a businessman, 1 am 
offering you a business proposition. You may name your own price,” 
“Hie rights to Rearden Mital are not tor sale,” 

“1 am tn a position to speak ot large sums of money. Govern- 
ment money.” 

Rearden sat without moving, the muscles of his cheeks pulled tight; 
but his glance was indifferent, focused only by the faint pull of mor- 
bid curiosity. 

“You are a businessman, Mr Rearden. This is a proposition which 
you cannot afford to ignore. On the one hand, you are gambling 
against great odds, you are bucking an unfavorable public opinion, 
you run a good chance of losing every penny you put into Rearden 
Metal. On the other hand, we can relieve you of the risk and the 
responsibility; at an impressive profit, an immediate profit, much 

171 



larger than you could hope to realize from the sale of the metal for 
the next twenty years/' 

“The State Science Institute is a scientific establishment, not a 
commercial one,” said Rearden. “What is it that they’re so afraid 
of?” 

“You are using ugly, unnecessary words, Mr. Rearden. 1 am en- 
deavoring to suggest that we keep the discussion on a friendly plane. 
The matter is serious.” 

”1 am beginning to see that.” 

“We are offering you a blank check on what is, as you realize, an 
unlimited account. What else can you want? Name your price.” 

“The sale of the rights to Rearden Metal is not open to discussion. 
If you have anything else to say. please say it and leave.” 

The man leaned back, looked at Rearden incredulously and asked, 
“What are you after?” 

’i? What do you mean?” 

“You’re m business to make money, aren’t you?” 

“I am.” 

"You want to make as big a profit as possible, don't you?” 

“I do.” 

“Then why do you want to snuggle tor years, squeezing out your 
gains in the form of pennies pel ton — rather than accept a fortune 
for Rearden Metal? Why?” 

“Because it's mine. Do you understand the word ’” 

The man sighed and rose to his teet “1 hope you will not have 
cause to regret your decision. Mr. Rearden,” he said; the tone of his 
voice was suggesting the opposite. 

“Good day,” said Rearden. 

“I think 1 must tell you that the State Science Institute may issue 
an official statement condemning Rearden Metal.” 

“That is their privilege.” 

“Such a statement would make things more difficult for you.” 

“Undoubtedly.” 

“As to further consequences . . .” The man shrugged. “ This is not 
the day for people who refuse to co-operate. In this age, one needs 
friends. You are not a popular man, Mr. Rearden.” 

“What are you tiying to say?” 

“Surely, you understand.” 

“I don’t.” 

“Society is a complex structure. There arc so many different issues 
awaiting decision, hanging by a thin thread. We can never tell when 
one such issue may be decided and what may be the decisive factor 
in a delicate balance. Do 1 make mvself clear?” 

“No.” 

The red flame of poured steel shot through the twilight. Ajp orange 
glow, the color of deep gold, hit the wall behind Hoarder's desk. 
The glow moved gently across his forehead. His face had atji unmov- 
ing serenity. 

“The State Science Institute is a government organization* Mr. Re- 
arden, There are certain bills pending in the Legislature, which may 

172 



be passed at any moment, Businessmen are peculiarly vulnerable 
these days. I am sure you understand me.” 

Rearden rose to his feet. He was smiling. He looked as if all 
tension had left him. 

“No, Dr. Potter,” he said, “I don’t understand. If I did. I’d have 
to kill you.” 

The man walked to the door, then stopped and looked at Rearden 
in a way which, for once, was simple human curiosity. Rearden stood 
motionless against the moving glow on the wall; he stood casually, 
his hands in his pockets. 

“Would you tell me,” the man asked, “just between us, it’s only 
my personal curiosity— why are you doing this?” 

Rearden answered quietly, “I’ll tell you. You won’t understand. 
You see, it’s because Rearden Metal is good.” 

* * 

Dagny could not understand Mr, Mowen’s motive. The Amalgam- 
ated Switch and Signal Company had suddenly given notice that they 
would not complete her order. Nothing had happened, she could 
find no cause for it and they would give no explanation. 

She had hurried to Connecticut, to see Mr. Mowen in person, 
but the sole result of the interview was a heavier, grayer weight of 
bewilderment in her mind. Mr. Mowen stated that he would not 
continue to make switches of Rearden Metal. For sole explanation, 
he said, avoiding her eyes, “Too many people don’t like it.” 

“What? Rearden Metal or your making the switches?” 

“Both, I guess . . . People don’t like it ... 1 don’t want any 
trouble,” 

“What kind of trouble?” 

“Any kind.” 

“Have you heard a single thing against Rearden Metal that’s 
true?” 

“Aw, who knows what’s true? . . . That resolution of the National 
Council of Metal Industries said — ” 

“Look, you’ve worked with metals all your life. For the last four 
months, you’ve worked with Rearden Metal. Don't you know that 
it’s the greatest thing you’ve ever handled?” He did not answer. 
“Don’t you know it?” He looked away “Don’t you know what’s 
true?” 

“Hell. Miss Taggart, I'm in business. I'm only a little guy. 1 just 
want to make money.” 

“How do you think one makes it?” 

But she knew that it was useless. Dxiking at Mr. Mowen s face, at 
the eyes which she could not catch, she felt as she had felt once on a 
lonely section of track, when a storm blew down the telephone wires 
that communications were cut and that words had become sounds 
which transmitted nothing. 

It was useless to argue, she thought, and to wonder about people 
who would neither refute an argument nor accept it. Sitting restlessly 
in the train, on her way back to New York, she told herself that Mr. 
Mowen did not matter, that nothing mattered now, except finding 
somebody else to manufacture the switches. She was wrestling with 

173 



a list of names in her mind, wondering who would be easiest to 
convince, to beg or to bribe. 

She knew, the moment she entered the anteroom of her office, 
that something had happened. She saw the unnatural stillness, with 
the faces of her staff turned to her as if her entrance were the mo- 
ment they had all waited for, hoped for and dreaded. 

Eddie Willers rose to his feet and started toward the door of her 
office, as if knowing that she would understand and follow. She had 
seen his face. No matter what it was. she thought, she wished it had 
not hurt him quite so badly. 

"The State Science Institute/' he said quietly, when they were 
alone in her office, M has issued a statement warning people against 
the use of Rearden Metal. 1 * He added, “It was on the radio. It’s in 
the afternoon papers." 

“What did they say?" 

"Dagny, they didn't say it! , . . I hey haven’t really said it, yet it’s 
there — and it — isn't. Thai’s what’s monstrous about it." 

His effort was focused on keeping his voice quiet; he could not 
control his words The words were forced out of him by the unbeliev- 
ing. bewildered indignation of a child screaming in denial at his first 
encounter with evil. 

"What did they say, Eddie?" 

"They . . . You'd have to read it." He pointed to the newspaper 
he had left on her desk. "They haven't said that Rearden Metal is 
bad. They haven't said that it’s unsafe. What they’ve done is . . ." 
His hands spread and dropped in a gesture of futility. 

She saw at a glance what they had done. She saw the sentences; 
"It may be possible that after a period of heavy usage, a sudden 
fissure may appear, though the length of this period cannot be 

predicted The possibility of a molecular reaction, at present 

unknown, cannot be entirely discounted. . . . Although the tensile 
strength of the metal is obviously demonstrable, certain questions in 
regard to its behavior under unusual stress are not to be ruled 
out. . . ' Although there is no evidence to support the contention 
that the use of the metal should be prohibited, a further study of its 
properties would be of value." 

"We can’t fight it. It can’t be answered," Eddie was saying dowly. 
"Wc can t demand a retraction. We can't show them our tests or 
prove anything. They’ve said nothing. They haven't said a thing that 
could be refuted and embarrass them professionally. It’s the job of 
a coward. You'd expect it from some con-man or blackmailer. Rut, 
Dagny! It's the State Science Institute!" 

She nodded silently. She stood, her eyes fixed on some point be- 
yond the window. At the end of a dark street, the bulbs of an electric 
sign kept going on and off, as if winking at her maliciously. 

Eddie gathered his strength and said in the tone gif a military 
report, "Taggart slock has crashed, lien Nealy quit. fThe National 
Brotherhood of Road and Track Workers has forbiddeji its members 
to work on the Rio Norte Line. Jim has left town." 

She took her hat and coat off, walked across the roobi and slowly, 
very deliberately sat down at her desk. 

174 



She noticed a large brown envelope lying before her; it bore the 
letterhead of Rearden Steel. 

“That came by special messenger, right after you left/’ said Eddie. 
She put her hand on the envelope, but did not open it. She knew 
what it was: the drawings of the bridge. 

After a while, she asked, “Who issued that statement?'’ 

Eddie glanced at her and smiled briefly, bitterly, shaking his head. 
“No,” he said. “1 thought of that, too. I called the Institute long- 
distance and asked them. No, it was issued by the office of Dr. Floyd 
Ferris, their co-ordinator.” 

She said nothing. 

“But still! Dr. Stadler is the head of that Institute. He u the Insti- 
tute. He must have known about it. He permitted it. if it’s done, it's 
done in his name . . . Dr. ^Robert Stadler ... Do you remember . . . 
when we were in college . . . how we used to talk about the great 
names in the world . . the men of pure intellect . . . and we always 
chose his name as one of them, and—” He stopped. “Fm sorry, 
Dngny. I know it's no use saying anything. Only—” 

She sat, her hand pressed to the brown envelope. 

“Dagny,” he asked, his voice low, “what is happening to people? 
Why did that statement succeed? It s such an obvious smear-job, so 
obvious and so rotten. You’d think a decent person would throw it tit 
the gutter. How could” — his voice was breaking in gentle, desperate, 
rebellious anger— “how could they accept it? Didn't they read it? 
Didn't they see? Don’t they think? Dagny! What is it in people that 
lets them do this — and how can we live with it?” 

‘Quiet, Eddie.” she said, “quiet. Don’t be afraid.” 

♦ * 

The building of the State Science institute stood ovet a river of 
New Hampshire, on a lonely hillside, halfway between the river and 
the sky. From a distance, it looked like a solitary monument in a 
virgin forest. The trees were carefully planted, the roads were laid 
out as a park, the roof tops of a small town could be seen in a valley 
some miles away. But nothing had been allowed to come too dose 
and detract from the building’s austerity. 

The white marble of the walls gave it a classical grandeur: the 
composition of its rectangular masses gave it the cleanliness and 
beauty of a modern plant, It was an inspired structure. From across 
the river, people looked at it with reverence and thought of it as a 
monument to a living man whose character had the nobility of the 
building’s lines. Over the entrance, a dedication was cut into the 
marble: “To the fearless mind. To the inviolate truth,” In a quiet 
aisle, in a bare corridor, a small brass plate, such as dozens of other 
name plates on other doors, said: Dr, Robert Stadler. 

At the age of twenty-seven. Dr. Robert Stadler had written a trea- 
tise on cosmic rays, which demolished most of the theories held 
by the scientists who preceded hint. Those who followed, found his 
achievement somewhere at the base of any line of inquiry they un- 
dertook. At the age of thirty, he was recognized as the greatest 
physicist of his time. At thirty-two, he became head of the Depart- 
ment of Physics of the Patrick Henry University, in the days when 

175 



the great University still deserved its glory. It was of Dr. Robert 
Sfadler that a writer had said: ‘Perhaps, among the phenomena of 
the universe which he is studying, none is so miraculous as the brain 
of Dr. Robert Stadler himself” it was Dr. Robert Stadler who had 
once corrected a student: “Free scientific inquiry? The first adjective 
is redundant.” 

At the age of forty. Dr. Robert Stadler addressed the nation, en- 
dorsing the establishment of a State Science Institute. “Set science 
free of the rule of the dollar,” he pleaded. The issue had hung in 
the balance; an obscure group of scientists had quietly forced a bill 
through its long way to the floor of the Legislature; there had been 
some public hesitation about the bill, some doubt, an uneasiness no 
one could define. The name of Dr. Robert Stadler acted upon the 
country like the cosmic rays he studied: it pierced any barrier. The 
nation built the white marble edifice as a personal present to one of 
its greatest men. 

Dr. Stadler’s office at the Institute was a small room that looked 
like the office of the bookkeeper of an unsuccessful firm. There was 
a cheap desk of ugly yellow oak, a filing cabinet, two chairs, and a 
blackboard chalked with mathematical formulas. Sitting on one of 
the chairs against a blank wall, Dagny thought that the office had 
an air of ostentation and elegance, together: ostentation, because it 
seemed intended to suggest that the owner was great enough to 
permit himself such a setting; elegance, because he truly needed 
nothing else. 

She had met Dr. Stadler on a few occasions, at banquets given by 
leading businessmen or great engineering societies, in honor of some 
solemn cause or another. She had attended the occasions as reluc- 
tantly as he did, and had found that he liked to talk to her. “Miss 
Taggart,” he had said to her once, “1 never expect to encounter 
intelligence. That I should find it here is such an astonishing relief!” 
She had come to his office, remembering that sentence. She sat, 
watching him in the manner of a scientist: assuming nothing, dis- 
carding emotion, seeking only to observe and to understand. 

“Miss Taggart.” he said gaily, “I'm curious about you. I’m curious 
whenever anything upsets a precedent. As a rule, visitors are a pain- 
ful duty to me. I’m frankly astonished that 1 should feel such a simple 
pleasure m seeing you here. Do you know what it’s like to feel 
suddenly that one can talk without the strain of trying to force some 
sort of understanding out of a vacuum?” 

He sat on the edge of his desk, his manner gaily informal. He was 
not tall, and his slenderness gave him an air of youthful energy, 
almost of boyish zest. His thin face was ageless; it was a homely 
face, but the great forehead and the large gray eyes held such an 
arresting intelligence that one a>uld notice nothing else. There were 
wrinkles of humor in the corners of the eyes, and faint dines of 
bitterness in the corners of the mouth. He did not look li kb a man 
in his early fifties; the slightly graying hair was his only sig|i of age. 

“Tell me more about yourself,” be said. “I always meai$t to ask 
you what you’re doing in such an unlikely career as heavy! industry 
and how you can stand those people.” 

176 



“1 cannot take too much of your time* Dr, Stabler.” She spoke 
with polite, impersonal precision. “And the matter I came to discuss 
is extremely important.” 

He laughed. “ There's a sign of the businessman —wanting to come 
to the point at once. Well* by all means. But don’t worry about my 
time -—it’s yours. Now, what was it you said you wanted to discuss? 
Oh yes. Rearden Metal. Not exactly one of the subjects on which 
I'm best informed, but if there’s anything I can do for you — ” His 
hand moved in a gesture of invitation. 

“Do you know the statement issued by this Institute in regard to 
Rearden Metal?” 

He frowned slightly. “Yes, I’ve heard about it.” 

“Have you read it?” 

“No.” 

“It was intended to prevent the use of Rearden Metal.” 

“Yes, yes, I gathered that much.” 

“Could you tell me why?” 

He spread his hands: they were attractive hands— long and bony, 
beautiful in their suggestion of nervous energy and strength. “I really 
wouldn't know. That is the province of Dr. Ferris. I’m sure he had 
his reasons. Would you like to speak to Dr. Ferris?” 

“No. Are you familiar wirh the metallurgical nature of Rearden 
Metal, Dr. Stadler?” 

“Why. yes. a little. But tell me, why are you concerned about it?” 

A flicker of astonishment rose and died in her eyes; she answered 
without change in the impersonal tone of her voice, “I am building 
a branch line with rails of Rearden Metal, which— ” 

“Oh, but of course! I did hear something about it You must for- 
give me, I don’t read the newspapers as regularly as ! should. It’s 
\our railroad that’s building that new branch, isn’t it?” 

“'Hie existence of my railroad depends upon the completion of 
that branch — and. I think, eventually, the existence of this country 
will depend on it as well.” 

The wtinkles of amusement deepened about his eyes. “Can you 
make such a statement with positive assurance. Miss Taggart? I 
couldn’t.” 

“In this case?” 

“In any case. Nobody can tell what the course of a counity’s future 
may be. it is not a matter of calculable trends, but a chaos subject 
to the rule of the moment, in which anything is possible.” 

“Do you think that production is necessary to the existence of a 
country, Dr. Stadler?” 

“Why, yes, yes, of course.” 

“T he building of our branch line has been stopped by the state- 
ment of this Institute.” 

He did not smile and he did not answer. 

“Does that statement represent your conclusion about the nature 
of Rearden Metal?” she asked, 

“1 have said that 1 have not read it.” There was an edge of sharp- 
ness in his voice. 

She opened her bag, took out a newspaper dipping and extended 

177 



it to him. “Would you read it and tell me whether this is a language 
which science may properly speak?” 

He glanced through the clipping, smiled contemptuously and 
tossed it aside with a gesture of distaste. “Disgusting, isn’t it?” he 
said, “But what can you do when you deal with people?” 

She looked at him, not understanding. “You do not approve of 
that statement?” 

He shrugged. “My approval or disapproval would be irrelevant.” 

“Have you formed a conclusion of your own about Rearden 
Metal?” 

“Well, metallurgy is not exactly —what shall we say? — my 
specialty.” 

“Have you examined any data on Rearden Metal?” 

“Miss Taggart, 1 don’t see the point of your questions.” His voice 
sounded faintly impatient. 

“1 would like to know your personal verdict on Rearden Metal." 

“For what purpose?” 

“So that I may give it to the press." 

He got up, “That is quite impossible.” 

She said, her voice strained with the effort of trying to force under- 
standing, “I will submit to you all the information necessary to form 
a conclusive judgment.” 

“1 cannot issue any public statements about it.” 

“Why not?” 

“'lire situation is much too complex to explain m a casual 
discussion.” 

“But if you should find that Rearden Metal is, in fact, an extremely 
valuable product which—” 

“That is beside the point.” 

"The value of Rearden Metal is beside the point?” 

“There are other issues involved, besides questions ol iact.” 

She asked, not quite believing that she had heard him right, "What 
other issues ts science concerned with, besides questions of fact?” 

The bitter lines of his mouth sharpened into the suggestion of a 
smite. “Miss Taggart, you do not understand the problems of .scientists.” 

She said slowly, as if she were seeing it suddenly in time with her 
words, “l believe that you do know what Rearden Metal really is ” 

He shrugged. "Yes, l know. From such information as I've seen, 
it appears to be a remarkable thing. Quite a brilliant achievement— 
as far as technology is concerned.” He was pacing impatiently across 
the office. “In fact, I should like, some day, to order a special labora- 
tory motor that would stand just such high temperatures as Rearden 
Metal can take. It would be very valuable in connection witb certain 
phenomena 1 should like to observe. I have found that whenl particles 
are accelerated to a speed approaching the speed of light, *ihcy — ” 

“Dr, Stadler,” she asked slowly, “you know the truth, yet vou will 
not state it publicly?” 

“Miss Taggart, you are using an abstract term, when we fare deal- 
ing with a matter of practical reality.” 

“Wc are dealing with a matter of science ” 

178 



“Science? Aren’t you confusing the standards involved? it is only 
in the realm of pure science that truth is an absolute criterion. When 
wc deal with applied science, with technology — we deal with people. 
And when we deal with people, considerations other than truth enter 
the question.” 

“What considerations?” 

“1 am not a technologist Miss Taggart. I have no talent or taste 
for dealing with people. I cannot become involved in so-called practi- 
cal matters.” 

“That statement was issued in your name.” 

“I had nothing to do with it!” 

“The name of this Institute is your responsibility.” 

“That’s a perfectly unwarranted assumption.” 

"People think that the honor of your name is the guarantee behind 
any action of this Institute.” 

“I can’t help what people think — if they think at all!” 

“They accepted your statement It was a lie.” 

“How can one deal in truth when one deals with the public?” 

"I don’t understand you.” she said very quietly. 

“Questions of truth do not enter into social issues No principles 
have ever had any effect on society.” 

“What, then, directs men’s actions?” 

He shrugged. “The expediency of the moment.” 

“Dr. Sladler,” she said, “1 think l must tell you the meaning and 
the consequences o! the fact that the construction ot my branch line 
is being stopped. 1 am stopped, in the name ot public safety, because 
1 am using the best rail ever produced. In six months, if l do not 
complete that line, the best industrial section ot the country will be 
left without transportation It will be destroyed, because it was the 
best and there were men who thought a expedient to seize a share 
of its wealth.” 

“Well, that may be vicious, unjust, calamitous — but such is life in 
society. Somebody is always sacrificed, as a rule unjustly; there is no 
other wav to live among men. What can any one person do?” 

“You can state the truth about Reardon Metal.” 

He did not answer. 

“1 could beg you to do it in order to save me. 1 could beg you to 
do it in order to avert a national disaster. But 1 won’t These may 
not be valid reasons. There is only one reason: you must say it, 
because it is true.” 

”1 was not consulted about that statement!” The cry broke out 
involuntarily. T wouldn’t have allowed it! I don't like it any better 
than you do! But l can’t issue a public denial!” 

“You were not consulted? Then shouldn’t you want to find out 
the reasons behind that statement?” 

“I can’t destroy the Institute now!” 

“Shouldn’t you want to find out the reasons?” 

“1 know the reasons! They won’t tell me, but I know. And l can’t 
say that I blame them, either.” 

“Would you tell me?” 

“t’H tell you, if you wish, IPs the truth that you want, isn’t it? Dr. 

170 



Ferris cannot help it, if the morons who vote the funds for this 
Institute insist on what they call results. They are incapable of con- 
ceiving of such a thing as abstract science. They can judge it only in 
terms of the latest gadget it has produced for them. I do not know 
how Dr. Ferris has managed to keep this Institute in existence, I can 
only marvel at his practical ability. I don’t believe he ever was a 
first-rate scientist — but what a priceless valet of science! I know that 
he has been facing a grave problem lately. He’s kept me out of it, 
he spares me all that, but I do hear rumors. People have been criticiz- 
ing the Institute, because, they say, we have not produced enough. 
The public has been demanding economy. In times like these, when 
their fat little comforts are threatened, you may be sure that science 
is the first thing men will sacrifice. This is the only establishment 
left. There are practically no private research foundations any longer. 
Look at the greedy ruffians who run our industries. You cannot 
expect them to support science.” 

“Who is supporting you now?" she asked, her voice low. 

He shrugged. “Society." 

She said, with effort, “You were going to tell me the reasons 
behind that statement." 

“I wouldn’t think you’d find them hard to deduce. If you consider 
that for thirteen years this Institute has had a department of metal- 
lurgical research, which has cost over twenty million dollars and has 
produced nothing but a new' silver polish and a new anti -corrosive 
preparation, which, I believe, is not so good as the old ones- you 
can imagine what the public reaction will be if some private individ- 
ual comes out with a product that revolutionizes the entire science 
of metallurgy and proves to be sensationally successful!" 

Her head dropped. She said nothing. 

“I don’t blame our metallurgical department!" he said angrily “I 
know that results of this kind are not a matter of any predictable 
time. But the public won’t understand it. What, then, should we 
sacrifice? An excellent piece of smelting — or the last center of sci 
ence left on earth, and the whole future of human knowledge 7 That 
is the alternative.” 

She sat, her head down. Alter a while, she said, “All right, Dr 
Stadler. I won’t argue.” 

He saw her groping for her bag, as if she were trying to remember 
the automatic motions necessary to get up. 

“Miss Taggart,” he said quietly. It was almost a plea. She looked 
up. Her face was composed and empty. 

He came closer; he leaned with one hand against the wall above 
her head, almost as if he wished to hold her in the circle of his arm. 
“Miss Taggart,” he said, a lone of gentle, bitter persuasiveness in 
his voice, “I am older than you. Believe me, there is no other way 
to live on earth. Men are not open to truth or reason. They cannot 
be reached by a rational argument. The mind is powerlejjjs against 
them. Yet we have to deal with them. If we want to a&omplish 
anything, we have to deceive them into letting us accomplish it. Or 
force them. They understand nothing else. We cannot expect their 
support for any endeavor of the intellect* for any goal of the spirit. 

180 



.They are nothing but vicious animals. They are greedy* self-indulgent* 
predatory dollar-chasers who—” 

“lam one of the dollar-chasers, Dr. Stadlcr " she said* her voice 
low. 

“You arc an unusual* brilliant child who has not seen enough of 
life to grasp the full measure of human stupidity. I’ve fought it all 
my life. I’m very tired. . . The sincerity of his voice was genuine. 
He walked slowly away from her. “There was a time when I looked 
at the tragic mess they’ve made of this earth, and I wanted to cry 
out, to beg them to listen— l could teach them to live so much better 
than they did — but there was nobody to hear me. they had nothing 
to hear me with. . . , Intelligence? It is such a rare, precarious spark 
that flashes for a moment somewhere among men, and vanishes. One 
cannot tell its nature, or its future ... or its death. . . 

She made a movement to rise. 

“Don’t go, Miss Taggart. I'd like you to understand.” 

She raised her face to him, in obedient indifference. Her face was 
not pale, but its planes stood out with strangely naked precision, as 
if its skin had lost the shadings of color. 

“You’re young," he said. “At your age, I had the same faith in 
the unlimited power of reason. The same brilliant vision of man as 
a rational being. 1 have seen so much, since I have been disillusioned 
so often. ...Id like to tell you just one story." 

He stood at the window of his office. It had grown dark outside. 
The darkness seemed to rise from the black cut ot the river, far 
below. A few lights trembled in the water, from among the hills of 
the other shore. The sky was still the inten<e blue of evening. A 
lonely star, low over the earth, seemed unnaturally large and rpade 
the sky look darker. 

“When 1 was at the Patrick Henry University,” he said, “1 had 
three pupils. I have had many bright students in the past, but these 
three were the kind of reward a teacher prays for. If ever you could 
wish to receive the gift of the human mind at its best, young and 
delivered into your hands for guidance, they were this gift. Theirs 
was the kind of intelligence one expects to see. in the future, chang- 
ing the course of the world. They came from very different back- 
grounds. but they were inseparable friends. They made a strange 
choice of studies. They majored in two subjects — mine and Hugh 
Akston ’s, Physics and philosophy. It is not a combination of interests 
one encounters nowadays. Hugh Akston was a distinguished man. a 
great mind . . . unlike the incredible creature whom that University 
has now put in his place. . . . Akston and I were a little jealous of 
each other over these three students. It was a kind of contest be- 
tween us, a friendly contest, because we understood each other. I 
heard Akston saying one day that he regarded them as his sons. I 
resented it a little . . . because l thought of them as mine. . . 

He turned and looked at her. The bitter lines of age were visible 
now, cutting across his cheeks. He said, “When I endorsed the estab- 
lishment of this Institute, one of these three damned me. I have not 
seen him since. It used to disturb me, in the first few years. I won* 

181 



dterei 1 once in a while, whether he had been right. ... It has ceased 
to disturb me. long ago.’* 

He smiled. There was nothing but bitterness now, in his smile and 
his face, 

"These three men, these three who held ail the hope which the 
gift of intelligence ever proffered, these three from whom we ex- 
pected such a magnificent future — one of them was Francisco d’An- 
conia, who became a depraved playboy. Another was Ragnar 
Danneskjdld. who became a plain bandit. So much for the promise 
of the human mind.” 

"Who was the third one?” she asked. 

He shrugged. “The third one did not achieve even that sort of 
notorious distinction. He vanished without a trace- -into the great 
unknown of mediocrity. He is probably a second assistant book- 
keeper somewhere ” 

4 4 

“ft’s a he! I didn’t run away!” cried James Taggart. “I came here 
because 1 happened to he sick. Ask Dr. Wilson, it's a term of flu. 
He’ll prove it. And how did you know that I was here?” 

Dagny sti>od in the middle of the room, there were melting snow- 
flakes on her coat collar, on the brim of her hat. She glanced around, 
feeling an emotion that would have been sadness, had she had time 
to acknowledge it 

It was a room in the house of the old Taggart estate on the Hud- 
son. Jim had inherited the place, but he seldom came here. In their 
childhood, this had been their father's study. Now it had the desolate 
air of a room which is used, yet uninhabited. There were slipcovers 
on all but two chairs, a cold fireplace and the dismal warmth of an 
electric heater with a cord twisting across the floor, a desk, its glass 
surface empty 

Jim lay on the couch, with a towel wrapped for a sea if around his 
neck. She saw a Male, filled ashtray on a chair Inside him. a bottle of 
whisky, a wilted paper cup. and two-day-old newspapers scattered about 
the floor. A portrait of their grandfather hung over the fiteplace, full 
figure, with a railroad bridge in the fading background. 

“I have no time for arguments. Jim.” 

“It was your idea! I hope you’ll admit to the Board that it was your 
idea. That's what your goddamn Rearden Metal has done to us* If 
wc had waited for Orren Boyle . . His unshaved face was pulled 
by a twisted scramble of emotions; panic, hatred, a touch of triumph, 
the relief of screaming at a victim —and the faint, cautious, begging 
look that sees a hope of help. 

He had stopped tentatively, but she did not answer. She stood 
watching him, her hands in the pockets of her coat. 

"There’s nothing we can do now?” he moaned. "I tried to call 
Washington, to get them to seize the Phoenix* Du ran|o and turn it 
over to us, on the ground of emergency', but they wonTt even discuss 
it! Too many people objecting, they say, afraid of some fool prece- 
dent or another! ... I got the National Alliance of Railroads to 
suspend the deadline and permit Dan Conway to operate his road 
for another year— that would have given us time— bijt he’s refused 

182 



to do it 1 1 tried 10 get Ellis Wyatt and his bunch of friends in Colo* 
rack) to demand that Washington order Conway to continue opera- 
tions — but all of them, Wyatt and all the rest of those bastards, 
refused! It's their skin, worse than ours, they’re sure to go down the 
drain — but they’ve refused!” 

She smiled briefly, but made no comment 

“Now there’s nothing left for us to do! We’re caught. We can’t 
give up that branch and we can’t complete it. We can’t stop or go 
on, We have no money. Nobody will touch us with a ten-foot pole! 
What have we got left without the Rio Norte Line? But we can’t 
finish it. We’d be boycotted. We’d be blacklisted. That union of track 
workers would sue us. They would, there's a law about it. We can’t 
complete that Line! Christ! What are we going to do?” 

She waited. “Through, Jim?” she asked coldly, if you are, lil 
tell you what we re going to do.” 

He kept silent, looking up at her from under his heavy eyelids. 

“This is not a proposal, Jim. It’s an ultimatum. Just listen and 
accept, f am going to complete the construction of the Rio Norte 
Line. 1 personally, not Taggart Transcontinental. 1 will take a leave 
of absence from the job of Vice-President. 1 will form a company in 
my own name. Your Board will turn the Rio Norte Line over to me. 

1 will act as my own contractor. 1 will get my own financing. I will 
take full charge and sole responsibility. 1 will complete the Line on 
lime. After you have seen how the Rearden Metal rails can take it, 
I will transfer the Line back to Taggart Transcontinental and I'll 
return to my job. That is all.” 

He was looking at her silently, dangling a bedroom slipper on the 
tip of his foot. She had never supposed that hope could look ugly 
in a man's lace, but it did; it was mixed with cunning. She turned 
her eyes away from him, wondering how it was possible that a man's 
first thought in such a moment could be a search for something to 
put over on her. 

Then, preposterously, the first thing he said, his voice anxious, 
was, “But who will run Taggart Transcontinental in the meantime?” 

She chuckled; the sound astonished her. it seemed old in its bitter- 
ness. She said, “Bddie Wilier s.” 

“Oh no 1 He couldn’t!” 

She laughed, m the same brusque, mirthless way. “1 thought you 
were smarter than i about things of this kind. Eddie will assume the 
title ot Acting Vice-President. He will occupy my office and sit at my 
desk. But who do you suppose will run Taggart Transcontinental?” 

“But 1 don't see how — ” 

“l will commute by plane between Eddie’s office and Colorado, 
Also, there arc long-distance phones available. I will do just what l 
have been doing. Nothing will change, except the kind of show you 
will put on for your friends . . . and the fact that it will be a little 
harder for me.” 

“What show?” 

“You understand me, Jim* I have no idea what sort of games 
you’re tangled in, you and your Board of Directors, l don’t know 
how many ends you’re all playing against the middle and against one 

183 



another, or how many pretenses you have to keep up in how many 
opposite directions, I don't know or care, You can all hide behind 
me. If you're all afraid, because you've made deals with friends 
who 1 re threatened by Rearden Metal — well, here's your chance to 
go through the motions of assuring them that you're not involved, 
that you're not doing this — I am. You can help them to curse me 
and denounce me. You can all stay home, take no risks and make 
no enemies. Just keep out of my way.” 

''Weil . . he said slowly, "of course, the problems involved in 
the policy of a great railroad system are complex . . . while a small, 
independent company, in the name of one person, could afford to — ” 

"Yes, Jim, yes, I know all that. The moment you announce that 
you're turning the Rio Norte Line over to me, the Taggart stock will 
rise. The bedbugs will stop crawling from out of unlikely corners, 
since they won’t have the incentive of a big company to bite. Before 
they decide what to do about me, 1 will have the Line finished. And 
as for me, I don't want to have you and your Board to account to, 
to argue with, to beg permissions from. There isn't any time for that, 
if I am to do the kind of job that has to be done. So I’m going to 
do it alone." 

"And . . if you fail?" 

"If i fail. I’ll go down alone. 1 ' 

"You understand that in such case Taggart Transcontinental will 
not be able to help you in any way?" 

"I understand." 

"You will not count on us?" 

"No.” 

"You will cut all official connection with us, so that your activities 
will not reflect upon our reputation?” 

"Yes. 

‘i think we should agree that in case of failure or public scandal . . 
your leave of absence will become permanent . . . that is, you will 
not expect to return to the post of Vice-President." 

She closed her eyes for a moment. "All right. Jim. In such case, 
I will not return." 

"Before we transfer the Rio Norte Line to you, we must have a 
written agreement that you will transfer it back to us, along with 
your controlling interest at cost, in case the Line becomes successful. 
Otherwise you might try' to squeeze us for a windfall profit, since 
we need that Line." 

There was only a brief stab of shock in her eyes, then she said 
indifferently, the words sounding as if she were tossing alms, "By all 
means, Jim. Have that slated in writing.’’ 

"Now as to vour temporary successor ..." 

"Yes?" 

"You don’t really want it to be Eddie Wiilers, do you?’ 

"Yes. I do." 

"But he couldn’t even act tike a vice-president! He doesn't have 
the presence, the manner, the—” 

"He knows his work and mine. He knows what 1 want. 1 trust 
him, PH be able to work with him.” 

184 



‘‘Don’t you think it would be better to pick one of our more 
distinguished young men, somebody from a good family, with more 
social poise and — ” 

“It's going to be Eddie Willers* Jim.” 

He sighed. “AH right. Only . . . only we must be careful about 
it. . . , We don't want people to suspect that it’s you who’re still 
running Taggart Transcontinental. Wobody must know it.” 

“Everybody will know it, Jim. But since nobody will admit it 
openly, everybody will be satisfied.” 

“But we must preserve appearances.” 

“Oh, certainly! You don't have to recognize me on the street, if 
you don’t want to. You can say you've never seen me before and 
I’ll say I’ve never heard of Taggart Transcontinental.” 

He remained silent, trying to think, staring down at the floor. 

She turned to look at the grounds beyond the window. The sky 
had the even, gray-white pallor ot winter. Far below, on the shore 
of the Hudson, she saw the road she used to watch for F'rancisco’s 
car — she saw the cliff over the river, where they climbed to look for 
the towers of New York — and somewhere beyond the woods were 
the trails that led to Rockdale Station. ITie earth was snow-covered 
now, and what remained was like the skeleton of the countryside 
she remembeied — a thin design of bare branches rising from the 
snow to the sky. It was gray and while, like a photograph, a dead 
photograph which one keeps hopefully for remembrance, but which 
has no power to bring back anything. 

“What are you going to call it?” 

She turned, startled, “What‘S' 

“What arc you going to call your company?” 

“Oh . Why, the Dagny Taggart Line. 1 guess'* 

“But . . Do you think that's wise? It*might be misunderstood. 
The Idggart might be taken as -” 

“Well, what do you want me to call it?” she snapped, worn down 
to anger. “The Miss Nobody 4> The Madam X? Ihe John Galt?” She 
slopped. She smiled suddenly, a cold, bright, dangerous smile. 
That's what I'm going to call it: the John Galt Line.” 

“Good God, no!” 

“Yes.” 

“But it's . . . it's just a cheap piece of slang!” 

“Yes.” 

“You can’t make a joke out ol such a serious project! . . . You 
can’t be so vulgar and . . . and undignified!” 

“Can't I?” 

“But for God's sake, why? ’ 

“Because it’s going to shock all the rest of them just as it 
shocked you.” 

“Eve never seen you playing for effects,” 

“l am, this time.” 

“But . . .” His voice dropped to an almost superstitious sound: 
“Look, Dagny, you know, it's . . . it's bad hick . . . What it stands 
for is . . He stopped. 

“What does it stand for?” 


185 



“1 don't know . . . but the way people use it. they always seem to 
say it out of — ” 

“Fear? Despair? Futility? 1 ’ 

“Yes . . . yes, that’s what it is." 

“That’s what I want to throw in their faces!” 

lire bright, sparkling anger in her eyes, her first look of enjoyment, 
made him understand that he had to keep still. 

“Draw up all the papers and all the red tape in the name of the 
John Galt Line,” she said. 

He sighed. “Well, it’s your Line.” 

“You bet it is!” 

He glanced at her. astonished. She had dropped the manners and 
style of a vice-president; she seemed to be relaxing happily to the 
level of yard crews and construction gangs. 

“As to the papers and the legal side of it,” he said, “there might 
be some difficulties. We would have to apply for the permission 
of—” 

She whirled to face him. Something of the bright, violent look still 
remained in her face. But it was not gay and she was not smiling. 
The look now had an odd. primitive quality. When he saw it, he 
hoped he would never have to see it again. 

“Listen, Jim,” she said: he had never heard that tone in any human 
voice. “There is one thing you can do as your part of the deal and 
you’d better do it: keep your Washington boys off. See to it that 
they give me all the permissions, authorizations, charters and other 
waste paper that their laws require. Don’t let them try to stop me 
If they try . . . Jim, people say that our ancestor, Nat Taggart, killed 
a politician who tried to refuse him a permission he should never 
have had to ask. 1 don’t know whether Nat Taggart did it or not. 
But HI tell you this: 1 know how he felt, if he did. If he didn’t — l 
might do the job for him, to complete the family legend. I mean 
it, Jim.” 

* * 

FraneiscoMAneonia sat in front of her desk. His face was blank. 
It had remained blank while Dagny explained to him. in the dear, 
impersonal tone of a business interview, the formation and purpose 
of her own railroad company. He had listened He had not pro- 
nounced a word. 

She had never seen his face wear that look of drained passivity 
There was no mockery, no amusement, no antagonism, it was as if 
he did not belong in these particular moments of existence and could 
not be reached. Yet his eyes looked at her attentively; they seemed 
to see more than she could suspect; they made her think of one -way 
glass; they let all light rays in, but none out. 

“Francisco, I asked you to come here, because I wanted you to 
see me in my office. You’ve never seen it. It would ha^e meant 
something to you, once.” 

His eyes moved slowly to look at the office. Its walls vfrere bare, 
except for three things: a map of Taggart Transcont»nental4-the orig- 
inal drawing of Nat Taggart, that had served as model for his 
statue — and a large railroad calendar, in cheerful crude colors, the 

186 



kind that was distributed each year, with a change of its picture, to 
every station along the Taggart track, the kind that had hung once 
in her first work place at Rockdale. 

He got up. He said quietly, “Dagny, for your sake, and” — it was 
a barely perceptible hesitation — “and in the name of any pity you 
might feel for me, don’t request what you’re going to request. Don't. 
Let me go now.” 

T his was not like him and like nothing she could ever have ex- 
pected to hear from him. After a moment, she asked. “Why?” 

“1 can’t answer you l can’t answer any questions. That is one of 
the reasons why it's best not to discuss it.” 

“You know what I am going to request?” 

“Yes. ” The way she looked at him was such an eloquent, desperate 
question, that he had to add. “I know that I am going to refuse,” 

“Why?” 

He smiled mirthlessly, spreading his hands out, as il to show her 
that this was what he had predicted and had wanted to avoid. 

She said quietly, “1 have to try, Francisco, I have to make the 
request. That's my part What you’ll do about it is yours. But I’ll 
know that I've tued everything.” 

He remained standing, but he inclined his head a little, in assent, 
and said, “1 will listen, if that will help you.” 

“1 need fifteen million dollars to complete the Rio Norte Line. I 
have obtained seven million against the laggart stock 1 own free 
and clear. 1 can raise nothing else. I will issue bonds m the name of 
mv new company, in the amount of eight million dollars. I called 
you here to ask you to buy these bonds ” 

He did not answer. 

"1 am simply a beggar. Francisco, and 1 am begging you for money, 

1 had always thought that one did not beg in business. I thought that 
one stood on the merit of what one had to offer, and gave value for 
value. This is not so any more, though I don't understand how we 
can act on any other rule and continue to exist. Judging by every 
objective tact, the Rio Norte Line is to be the best raitvoad in the 
country. Judging by every known standard, it is the best investment 
possible. And that is what damns me. I cannot raise money by offer- 
ing people a giHKl business ventuto: the fact that it's good, makes 
people reject it. 'there is no bank that would buy the bonds of my 
company. So 1 can’t plead merit. I can only plead ” 

Her voice was pronouncing the words with impersonal precision. 
She stopped, wailing for his answer. He remained silent. 

“I know that l have nothing to olter you,” she said. “1 can't speak 
to you in terms of investment. You don't care to make money. Indus- 
trial projects have ceased to concern you long ago. So l won’t pre- 
tend that it’s a fair exchange It's just begging.*’ She drew her breath 
and said, “Give me that money as alms, because it means nothing 
to you.” 

“Don't ” he said, his voice low. She could not tell whether the 
strange sound of it was pam or anger, his eyes were lowered. 

After a moment, she said, *i called you, not because 1 thought 
you would agree, but because you were the only one who could 

187 



understand what I am saying. So 1 had to try it.” Her voice was 
dropping lower, as if she hoped it would make emotion harder to 
detect “You see, I can’t believe that you’re really gone . . . because 
l know that you’re still able to hear me. The way you live is de- 
praved. But the way you act is not. Even the way you speak of it, 
is not. ... I had to try . . . But l can’t struggle to understand you 
any longer/’ 

“I’ll give you a hint. Contradictions do not exist. Whenever you 
think that you are facing a contradiction, check your premises. You 
will find that one of them is wrong.” 

“Francisco,” she whispered, “why don’t you tell me what it was 
that happened to you?” 

“Because, at this moment, the answer would hurt you more than 
the doubt.” 

“Is it as terrible as that ?” 

“It is an answer which you must reach by yourself.” 

She shook her head. ‘I don’t know what to offer you. 1 don’t 
know what is of value to you any longer. Don’t you see that even a 
beggar has to give value in return, has to offer some reason why 
you might want to help him’> . . . Well, I thought ... at one time, 
it meant a great deal to you— success. Industrial success. Remember 
how we used to talk about it? You were very severe You expected 
a lot from me. You told me I’d better live up to it. I have. You 
wondered how far I’d rise with Taggart Transcontinental.” She 
moved her hand, pointing at the office. “ Ibis is how far I’ve risen. . . . 
So I thought ... if the memory of what had been your values still 
has some meaning for you, if only as amusement, or a moment’s 
sadness, or just like . . . like putting flowers on a grave . . . you 
might want to give me the money . . . in the name of that.” 

“No.” 

She said, with effort, “That money would mean nothing to you — 
you’ve wasted that much on senseless parties — you’ve wasted much 
more on the San Sebastian Mines—” 

He glanced up. He looked straight at her and she saw the first 
spark of a living response in his eyes, a look that was bright, pitiless 
and, incredibly, proud: as if this were an accusation that gave him 
strength. 

“Oh, yes,” she said slowly, as if answering his thought, “I realize 
that. I’ve damned you for those mines, I’ve denounced you. I’ve 
thrown my contempt at you in every way possible, and now l come 
back to you — for money. Like Jim, tike any moocher you’ve ever 
met. I know it's a triumph for you, I know that you can laugh at me 
and despise me with full justice. Well-— perhaps I can offer you that. 
If it’s amusement that you want, it you enjoyed seeing Jir^i and the 
Mexican planners crawl — wouldn’t it amuse you to bheak me? 
Wouldn’t it give you pleasure? Don't you want to hear metacknowl- 
edge that I’m beaten by you? Don’t you want to see mci crawling 
before you? Tell me what form of it you’d like and I’ll sujbmit/’ 

He moved so swiftly that she could not notice how he parted: it 
only seemed to her that his first movement was a shudder,’ He came 
around the desk, he took her hand and raised it to his lipsi It began 

188 



as a gesture of the gTavest respect, as if its purpose were to give her 
strength; but as he held his lips, then his face, pressed to her hand, 
she knew that he was seeking strength from it himself. 

He dropped her hand, he looked down at her face, at the fright* 
ened stillness of her eyes, he smiled, not trying to hide that his smile 
held suffering, anger and tenderness. 

“Dagny, you want to crawl? You don’t know what the word means 
and never will. One doesn’t crawl by acknowledging it as honestly 
as that. Don’t you suppose 1 know that your begging me was the 
bravest thing you could do? But . . . Don’t ask me, Dagny." 

“In the name of anything I ever meant to you . she whispered, 
“anything left within you . . 

In the moment when she thought that she had seen this look 
before, that this was the way he had looked against the night glow 
of the city, when he lay in bed by her side for the last time— she 
heard his cry, the kind of cry she had never torn from him before: 

“My love, I can’t!'’ 

Ihen, as they looked at each other, both shocked into silence by 
astonishment, she saw the change in his face. It was as crudely abrupt 
as if he had thrown a switch. He laughed, he moved away from her 
and said, his voice jarringly offensive by being completely casual: 

“Please excuse the mixture in styles of expression. I've been sup* 
posed to say that to so many women, but on somewhat different 
occasions." 

Her head dropped, she sat huddled tight together, not caring that 
he saw it. 

When she raised her head, she looked at him indifferently. “AH 
right, Francisco It was a good act. I did believe it. If that was your 
own way of having the kind of fun 1 was offering you. you succeeded. 
1 won't ask you for anything." 

“I warned you." 

“I didn't know which side you belonged on. It didn't seem possi- 
ble —but it’s the side ot Orren Boyle and Bertram Scudder and your 
old teacher." 

“My old teacher?" he asked sharply. 

“Dr. Robert Stadler.” 

He chuckled, relieved. “Oh, that one? He's the looter who thinks 
that his end justifies his seizure of my means," He added, “You 
know, Dagny, I’d like you to remember which side you said I’m on. 
Some day, HI remind you of i* and ask you whether you’ll want to 
repeat it." 

“You won’t have to remind me." 

He turned to go. He tossed his hand in a casual salute and said, 
“If it could be built. I’d wish good luck to the Rio Noite Line." 

“It’s going to be built. And it's going to be called the John Galt 
Line." 

"Whut?r 

It was an actual scream; she chuckled derisively, “The John Galt 
l ine." 

“Dagny, in heaven’s name, why?" 

“Don’t you like it?" 


189 



“How did you happen to choose that?” 

“It sounds better than Mr. Nemo or Mr. Zero, doesn’t it?” 

“Dagny, why that?” 

“Because it frightens you,” 

“What do you think it stands for?” 

“The impossible. The unattainable. And you're all afraid of my 
Line just as you’re afraid of that name.” 

He started laughing- He laughed, not looking at her, and she felt 
strangely certain that he had forgotten her. that he was far away, 
that he was laughing— in furious gaiety and bitterness — at something 
in which she had no part. 

When he turned to her, he said earnestly, “Dagny, I wouldn’t, if 
I were you.” 

She shrugged. ‘Jim didn't like it. either.” 

“What do you like about it?” 

“I hate it! I hate the doom you’re all waiting for. the giving up, 
and that senseless question that always sounds like a cry for help. 
I’m sick of hearing pleas for John Galt. I’m going to light him.” 

He said quietly, “You are ” 

“I'm going to build a railroad tine for hnn. Let him come and 
claim it!” 

He smiled sadly and nodded- “He will.” 

* A 

The glow ot poured steel streamed across the ceiling and hiokc 
against one wait. Rearden sat at his desk, in the light of a single 
lamp. Beyond its circle, the darkness ot the ottice blended with the 
darkness outside. He felt as it it were empty space where the rays 
of the furnaces moved at will, as it the desk were a ratt hanging m 
midair, holding two persons imprisoned in privacy. Dagny sat in Ironl 
of his desk. 

She had thrown her coal off, and she sat outlined against it. a 
slim, tense body in a gray suit, leaning diagonally across the wide 
armchair. Only her hand lay in the light, on the edge of the desk; 
beyond it. 'he saw the pale suggestion of her face, the white of a 
blouse, the triangle of an open collar. 

“AH right. Hank,” she said, “we’re going ahead with a new Rear- 
den Metal bridge. Thts is the official order of the official owner of 
the John Galt Line.” 

He smiled, looking down at the drawings of the bridge spread in 
the light on his desk. “Have you had a chance to examine the scheme 
we submitted?” 

“Yes. You don’t need my comments or compliments. The order 
says it.” 

“Very well. Thank you. I'll start rolling the Metal.” 

“Don’t you want to ask whether the John Galt Line is ill a position 
to place orders or to function?” 

“I don’t need to. Your coming here says it.” 

She smiled. “True. It’s all set. Hank, I came to tell ycju that and 
to discuss the details of the bridge in person.” 

“All right, l am curious; who are the bondholders df the John 
Galt Line?” 


190 



*i don't think any of them could afford it. All of them have grow- 
ing enterprises. All of them needed their money for their own con- 
cerns. But they needed the Line and they did not ask anyone for 
help/’ She took a paper out of her bag. ‘‘Here's John Galt, Inc.," 
she said, handing it across the desk. 

He knew most of the names on the list: “Llhs Wyatt, Wyatt Oil, 
Colorado. Ted Nielsen, Nielsen Motors, Colorado. Lawrence Ham- 
mond, Hammond Cars, Colorado. Andrew Stockton, Stockton 
Foundry, Colorado." There were a few from other states; he noticed 
the name: “Kenneth Danagger, Danagger Coal, Pennsylvania." The 
amounts of their subscriptions varied, from sums in five figures to six. 

He reached for his fountain pen, wrote at the bottom of the list 
“Henry Reardon, Rearden Steel, Pennsylvania ---$L000,(XX)" and 
tossed the list back at her. 

“Hank," she said quietly, *1 didn’t want you in on this. You've 
invested so much m Rearden Metal that it’s worse for you than for 
any of us. You can’t aftord another risk." 

“1 never accept favors," he answered coldly. 

“What do you mean?" 

“I don’t ask people to lake greater chances on my ventures than 
1 take myself. If it’s a gamble. I'll match anybody’s gambling. Didn't 
you say that that track was my first showcase?" 

She inclined her head and said gravely. “All right. Thank you." 

“Incidentally. 1 don't expect to lose this money. I am aware of the 
conditions under which these bonds can be converted into stock at 
my option. 1 therefore expect to make an inordinate protit — and 
you’re going to earn it tor me." 

She laughed. “God, Hank. I've spoken to so many yellow fools 
that they've almost infected me into thinking of the Line as of a 
hopeless loss! Thanks for reminding me. Yes. 1 think 111 earn your 
inordinate profit for you." 

“If it weren’t for the yellow fools, there wouldn't be any risk in 
it at all. But we have to beat them. We will." He reached for two 
telegrams from among the papers on his desk “There are still a tew 
men m existence." He extended the telegrams *i think you’d like 
to see these." 

One of them read: “1 had intended to undertake it in two years, 
but the statement of the State Science Institute compels me to pro- 
ceed at onee. Consider this a commitment for the construction of a 
12-inch pipe line of Rearden Metal. bOO miles, Colorado to Kansas 
City. Details follow, Ellis Wyatt." 

Ihc other read: “Re our discussion of my order Go ahead. Ken 
Danaggci." 

He added, in explanation, “He wasn’t prepared to proceed at once, 
either. It’s eight thousand tons of Rearden Metal. Structural metal. 
For coal mines." 

they glanced at each other and smiled. They needed no further 
comment* 

He glanced down, as she handed the telegrams back to him. The 
skin of her hand looked transparent in the light, on the edge of 

191 



his desk, a young girl's hand with long, thin fingers, relaxed for a 
moment, defenseless. 

“The Stockton Foundry 1 in Colorado.” she said, “is going to finish 
that order for me- -the one that the Amalgamated Switch and Signal 
Company ran out on. l'hey're going to get in touch with you about 
the Metal/ 1 

“They ha\e already. What have you done about the const! uetton 
crews?” 

“Nealy's engineers are staving on, the best ones, those l need. 
And most ot the foremen, loo. It won't be too hard to keep them 
going, Nealy wasn't of much use. anyway.” 

“What about labor?” 

“More applicants than l can hire, I don't think the union is going 
to interfere. Most ot the applicants are giving phony names. They’re 
union members. They need the work desperately. I'll have a few 
guards on the lane; but 1 don't expect anv trouble ” 

“What about your brother Jim’s Board of Directors? ” 

They're all scrambling to get statements into the newspapers to 
the effect that they have no connection whatever with the John tialt 
Lane, and how reprehensible an undertaking they think it is. Hiey 
agreed to everything I asked/’ 

The fine of her shoulders looked taut, yet thrown back easily, as 
if poised for flight, tension seemed natural to her , not a sign of 
anxiety, but a sign of enjoyment; the tension of her whole body, 
under the gray suit, half-visible in the darkness. 

“Eddie W filers has taken over the office of Operating Vice-Presi- 
dent.” she said, “it you need anything, get in touch with him I'm 
leaving for Colorado tonight.” 

“Tonight? 1 / 

“Yes. We have to make up time. We've lost a week.” 

“Flying your own plane*” 

“Yes. Ill be back m about ten dayv 1 intend to be in New York 
once or twice a month *' 

“Where will you live out there 0 " 

“On the site. In my own railway car that is, Eddie's car, which 
I’m borrowing ” 

“Will you be safe?” 

‘ Safe from what *” Then she laughed, startled. “Why, Hank, it s 
the first time you’ve ever thought that I wasn't a man. Of course I’ll 
be safe “ 

He was not looking at her; he was looking at a sheet of figures 
on his desk. “I've had my engineers prepare a breakdown of the 
cost of the bridge.” he said, “and an approximate schedule of the 
construction time required. That js what l wanted to discuss with 
you.” He extended the papers. She settled back to readrthem. 

A wedge of light fell across her face. He saw the fi|m, sensual 
mouth in sharp outline. Then she leaned back a little, |md he saw 
only a suggestion ot its shape and the dark lines ot tfer towered 
lashes. 

Haven't 1?— he thought. Haven't I thought of it since tike first time 
I saw you? Haven't I thought of nothing else for two years'? ... He 

192 



sat motionless, looking at her. He heard the words he had never 
allowed himself to form, the words he had felt, known, yet had not 
faced, had hoped to destroy by never letting them be said within his 
own mind. Now it was as sudden and shocking as if he were saying 
it to her. . . . Since the first time l saw you . . . Nothing but your 
body, that mouth of yours, and the way your eyes would look at me, 
if . . . Through every sentence I ever said to you, through every 
conference you thought so safe, through the importance of all the 
issues we discussed ... You trusted me, didn’t you? To recognize 
your greatness? To think of you as you deserved — as if you were a 
man? . . . Don’t you suppose 1 know how much I’ve betrayed? The 
only bright encounter of my life — the only person I respected — the 
best businessman I know— -my ally— my partner in a desperate 
battle . . . The lowest of all desires — as iny answer to the highest 
I’ve met . . Do you know what I am? I thought of it, because it 
should have been unthinkable. For that degrading need, which 
should never touch you, I have never wanted anyone but you . . . L 
hadn’t known what it was like, to want it, until I saw you for the 
first time, f had thought: Not 1, l couldn't be broken by it , . Since 
then . . . for two years . . . with not a moment’s respite . . . Do you 
know what it’s like, to want it? Would you wish to hear what I 
thought when 1 looked at you . . . when 1 lay awake at night . , . 
when I heard your voice over a telephone wire . . when 1 worked, 
but could not drive it away? . . Jo bring you down to things you 
can t conceive - and to know' that it's l who have done it. lo reduce 
you to a body, to teach you an animal’s pleasure, to see you need 
it . to see you asking me lor it. to see your wonderful spirit dependent 
upon the obscenity of your need. To watch you as you are, as you face 
the world with your clean, proud strength — then to see you. in my bed, 
submitting to any infamous whim 1 may devise, to any act which V\\ 
perform for the sole purpose of watching your dishonor and to which 
you'll submit tor the sake of an unspeakable sensation . . I want 
vou - -and may I be damned for it! . . . 

She was reading the papers, leaning back m the darkness— he saw 
the reflection of the fire touching her hair, moving to her shoulder, 
down her arm. to the naked skin of her wrist. 

. . . Do you know what I'm thinking now, in this moment? . . 

Your gray suit and your open collar . , . you look so young, so 
austere, so sure of yourself . . . What would you be like if I knocked 
your head back; if 1 threw you down in that formal suit of yours, if 
1 raised your skirt — 

She glanced up at him. He looked down at the papers on his desk. 
In a moment, he said, “ Ibe actual cost of the bridge is less than our 
original estimate You will note that the strength of the bridge allows 
lor the eventual addition ol a second track, which, l thmk, that sec- 
tion of the country will justify in a very few years. If you spread the 
cost over a period of—” 

He spoke, and she looked at his face in the lamplight, against the 
black emptiness of the office. The lamp was outside her field of 
vision, and she felt as if it were his face that illuminated the papers 
on the desk. His face, she thought, and the cold, radiant clarity of 

193 



his voice, of his mine}, of his drive to a single purpose. The face was 
like his words — as if the line of a single theme ran from the steady 
glance of the eyes, through the gaunt muscles of the cheeks, to the 
faintly scornful, downward curve of the mouth — the line of a ruth- 
less asceticism. 

* * 

The day began with the news of a disaster: a freight train of the 
Atlantic Southern had crashed head-on into a passenger train, in 
New Mexico, on a sharp curve in the mountains, scattering freight 
cars all over the slopes. The cars carried five thousand tons of copper, 
bound from a mine in Arizona to the Rearden mills. 

Rearden telephoned the general manager of the Atlantic Southern, 
but the answer he received was: “Oh God, Mr. Rearden. how can 
we tell? How can anybody tell how long it will take to clear that 
wreck? One of the worst we’ve ever had ... I don’t know, Mr. 
Rearden. There are no other lines anywhere in that section. The 
track is torn for twelve hundred feet. There’s been a rockslide. Our 
wrecking train can’t get through. I don't know how we’ll ever get 
those freight cars back on rails, or when. Can’t expect it sooner than 
two weeks . . . Three days? Impossible, Mr. Rearden’ . . . But we 
can't help it! . . . But surely you can tell your customers that it's an 
act of God! What if you do hold them up? Nobody can blame you 
in a case of this kind!" 

In the next two hours, with the assistance of his secretary, two 
young engineers from his shipping department, a road map, and the 
long-distance telephone, Rearden arranged for a fleet of trucks to 
proceed to the scene of the wreck, and for a chain of hopper cars 
to meet them at the nearest station of the Atlantic Southern. The 
hopper cars had been borrowed from Taggart Transcontinental. The 
trucks had been recruited from all over New Mexico, Arizona and 
Colorado. Rearden’s engineers had hunted by telephone for private 
truck owners and had offered payments that cut all arguments short. 

It was die third of three shipments of copper that Rearden had 
expected; two orders had not been delivered: one company had gone 
out of business, the other was still pleading delays that it could not 
help. 

He had attended to the matter without breaking his chain of ap- 
pointments, without raising his voice, without sign of strain, uncer- 
tainty or apprehension; he had acted with the swift precision of a 
military commander under sudden fire — and Gwen Ives, his secre- 
tary, had acted as his calmest lieutenant. She was a girl in her 
late twenties, whose quietly harmonious, impenetrable face had a 
quality matching the best-designed office equipment; fhc was one 
of his most ruthlessly competent employees; her manner of per- 
forming her duties suggested the kind of rational cleanliness that 
would consider any clement of emotion, while at work. k \ s an unpar- 
donable immorality. 

When the emergency was over, her sole comment wa$, “Mr. Rear- 
den, i think we should ask all our suppliers to ship? via Taggart 
Transcontinental/* ‘Tm thinking that, too/* he answered^ then added, 

194 



“Wire Fleming in Colorado, Tell him I’m taking an option on that 
copper mine property.’* 

He was back at his desk, speaking lo his superintendent on one 
phone and to his purchasing manager on another, checking every 
date and ton of ore on hand — he could not leave to chance or to 
another person the possibility of a single hour’s delay in the flow of 
a furnace: it was the last of the rail for the John Galt Line that was 
being poured — when the buzzer rang and Miss Ives’ voice announced 
that his mother was outside, demanding to see him. 

He had asked his family never to come to the mills without an 
appointment. He had been glad that they hated the place and seldom 
appeared in his office. What he now felt was a violent impulse to 
order his mother off the premises. Instead, with a greater effort than 
the problem of the train wreck had required ot him, he said quietly, 
“All right. Ask her to come in.” 

His mother came in with an air of belligerent defensiveness. She 
looked at his office as if she knew what it meant to him and as if 
she were declaring her resentment against anything being of greater 
importance to him than her own person. She took a long time settling 
down in an armchair, arranging and rearranging her bag, her gloves, 
the folds of her dress, while droning, “It’s a fine thing when a mother 
has to wait in an anteroom and ask permission of a stenographer 
before she’s allowed to see her own son who — '* 

“Mother, is it anything important? 1 am very rushed today,” 

“You're not the only one who's got problems. Of course, it’s 
important. Do you think I'd go to the trouble of driving way out 
here, if it wasn’t important?” 

“What is it?” 

“It’s about Philip.” 

“Yes?” 

“Philip is unhappy.” 

“Well?” 

“He feels it's not right that he should have to depend on your 
charity and live on handouts and never be able to count on a single 
dollar of his own.” 

“Well!” he said with a stailied smile. “I’ve been waiting for him 
to realize that.” 

“It isn’t right for a sensitive man to be m such a position.” 

“It certainly isn't ” 

“I'm glad you agree with me. So what you have to do is give him 
a job.” 

“A . . . what?” 

“You must give him a job, here, at the mills — but a nice, clean 
job. of course, with a desk and an office and a decent salary, where 
he wouldn’t have to be among your day laborers and your smelly 
furnaces.” 

He knew that he was hearing it; he could not make himself believe 
it. “Mother, you’re not serious.” 

“I certainly am. 1 happen to know that that's what he wants; only 
he’s loo proud to ask you for it. But if you offer it to him and make 
it look like it’s you who're asking him a favor — why, l know he’d 

195 



be happy to take it. That’s why I had to come here to talk to you — 
so he wouldn't guess that I put you up to it." 

It was not in the nature of his consciousness to understand the 
nature of the things he was hearing. A single thought cut through 
his mind like a spotlight, making him unable to conceive how any 
eyes could miss it. The thought broke out of him as a cry of bewilder- 
ment: '"But he knows nothing about the steel business!" 

“What has that got to do with it? He needs a job." 

“But he couldn't do the work." 

“He needs to gain self-confidence and to feel important." 

“But he wouldn’t be any good whatever." 

“He needs to feel that he’s wanted." 

“Here? What could I want him for?" 

“You hire plenty of strangers." 

“I hire rnen who produce. What has he got to offer?" 

“He's your brother, isn’t he?" 

“What has that got to do with it?" 

She stared incredulously, in turn, silenced by shock. For a moment, 
they sat looking at each other, as if across an interplanetary distance. 

“He’s your brother," she said, her voice like a phonograph record 
repeating a magic formula she could not permit herself to doubt: 
“He needs a position in the world. He needs a salary, so that he’d 
feel that he's got money coming to him as his due, mil as alms." 

“As his due? But he wouldn't be worth a nickel to me." 

“Is that what you think of first? Your profit? I’m asking you to 
help your brother, and you’re figuring how to make a nickel on him, 
and you won’t help him unless there’s money in it for you — is that 
it?" She saw r the expression of his eyes, and she looked away, but 
spoke hastily, her voice rising “Yes, sure, you’re helping him — like 
you'd help any, stray beggar. Material help — that’s all you know or 
understand. Have you thought about his spiritual needs and what his 
position is doing to his self-respect? He doesn’t want to live like a 
beggar. He wants to be independent of you." 

“By means' of getting from me a salary he can’t earn for work he 
can’t do ?" 

“You’d never miss it. You’ve got enough people here who re mak- 
ing money for you." 

“Are you asking me to help him stage a fraud of that kind?" 

“You don’t have to put it that way." 

'is it a fraud — or isn’t it?" 

“That’s why I can’t talk to you — because you're not human. You 
have no pity, no feeling for your brother, no compassion for his 
feelings." 

“Is it a fraud or not?" 

“You have no mercy for anybody." 

“Do you think that a fraud of this kind would be just?" 

“You’re the most immoral man living— you think of notping out 
justice! You don’t feet any love at all!" 

He got up, his movement abrupt and stressed, the movement of 
ending an interview and ordering a visitor out of his office. ^Mother, 
I’m running a steel plant— not a whorehouse." 

1% 



“Henry!” The gasp of indignation was at his choice of language, 
nothing more. 

“Don’t ever speak to me again about a job for Philip. I would not 
give him the job of a cinder sweeper. 1 would not allow him inside 
my mills. I want you to understand that, once and for all. You may 
try to help him in any way you wish, but don’t ever let me see you 
thinking of my mills as a means to that end.” 

The wrinkles of her soft chin trickled into a shape resembling a 
sneer. “What are they, your mills — a holy temple of some kind?” 

“Why . . . yes,” he said softly, astonished at the thought. 

“Don’t you ever think of people and of your moral duties?” 

“1 don’t know what it is that you choose to call morality. No, I 
don’t think of people— -except that if I gave a job to Philip, I wouldn’t 
be able to face any competent man who needed work and de- 
served it.” 

She got up. Her head was drawn into her shoulders, and the righ- 
teous bitterness of hei voice seemed to push the words upward at 
his tall, straight figure: "That's your cruelly, that’s what's mean and 
selfish about you. If you loved your brother, you'd give him a job 
he didn’t deserve, precisely because he didn’t deserve it — that would 
be true love and kindness and brotherhood. Rise what's love for? If 
a man deserves a job. there’s no virtue in giving it to him. Virtue is 
the giving of the undeserved.” 

He was looking at her like a child at an unfamiliar nightmare, 
inciedulity preventing it from becoming horror. “Mother,” he said 
slowly, “you don't know what you’re saying. Fm not able ever to 
despise you enough to believe that you mean it.” 

l’hc look on her face astonished him more than all the rest: it was 
a look of defeat and yet of an odd, sly, cynical cunning, as if. for a 
moment, she held some worldly wisdom that mocked his innocence. 

The memory of that look remained in his mind, like a warning 
signal telling him that he had glimpsed an issue which he had to 
understand. But he could not grapple with it, he could not force his 
mind to accept it as worthy of thought, he could find no clue except 
his dim uneasiness and his revulsion — and he had no time to give it, 
he could not think of it now. he was facing his next caller seated in 
front of his desk— he was listening to a man who pleaded for his life. 

The man did not state it in such terms, but Rearden knew that 
that was the essence of the case. What the man put into words was 
only a plea for five hundred tons of steel. 

He was Mr. Ward, of the Ward Harvester Company of Minnesota. 
It was an unpretentious company with an unblemished reputation, 
the kind of business concern that seldom grows large, but never fails. 
Mr. Ward represented the fourth generation of a family that had 
owned the plant and had given it the conscientious best of such 
ability as they possessed. 

He was a man in his fifties, with a square, stolid face. Looking at 
him, one knew that he would consider it as indecent to let his face 
show suffering as to remove his clothes in public. He spoke in a dry. 
businesslike manner. He explained that he had always dealt, as his 
father had. with one of the small steel companies now taken over 

197 



by Orren Boyle's Associated Steel. He had waited for his last order 
of steel for a year. He had spent the last month struggling to obtain 
a personal interview with Reardcn. 

“I know that your mills are running at capacity. Mr. Rearden,” 
he said, “and I know that you are not in a position to take care of 
new orders, what with your biggest, oldest customers having to wait 
their turn, you being the only decent- -I mean, reliable— steel manu- 
facturer left in the country. 1 don’t know what reason to offer you 
as to why you should want to make an exception in my case. But 
there was nothing else for me to do. except close the doors of my 
plant for good, and I”— -there was a slight break in his voice — “1 
can’t quite see my way to closing the doors . . . as yet . . . so 1 
thought I'd speak to you, even if I didn't have much chance . . . still, 
I had to try- everything possible.” 

This was language that Rearden could understand. “1 wish 1 could 
help you out,” he said, “but this is the worst possible time for me, 
because of a very large, very special order that has to take prece- 
dence over everything.” 

“1 know. But would you just give me a hearing. Mr. Rearden?” 

“Sure.” 

“if it's a question of money, HI pay anything you ask. 11 I could 
make it worth your while that way, why, charge me any extra you 
please, charge me double the regular price, only let me have the 
steel 1 wouldn't care if 1 had to sell the harvester at a loss this veat. 
just so 1 could keep the doors open. I've got enough, personally, to 
run at a loss for a couple of years, if necessary, just to hold out 
because, I figure, things can’t go on this wav much longer, conditions 
are bound ro improve, they've got to or else we ll He did riot 
finish. He said firmly, “They’ve got to ” 

“They will,” said Rearden. 

The thought of the John Galt Line ran through his mind like a 
harmony under the confident sound of his words. The John Galt 
Line was mpvmg forward. Hie attacks on his Metal had ceased. He 
felt as if. miles apart across the country, he and Dagny Taggart now 
stood in empty space, their way cleared, free to finish the job. nicy’ll 
leave us alone to do it. he thought. The words were like a battle 
hymn in his mind: lhey’11 leave us alone. 

“Our plant capacity is one thousand harvesters per year,” said Mr. 
Ward. “Last year, we put out three hundred, t scraped the steel 
together from bankruptcy sales, and begging a few tons here and 
there from big companies, and just going around like a scavenger to 
all sorts of unlikely places— well, I won’t bore you with that, only I 
never thought I’d live to see the time when I’d have to do business 
that way. And all the while Mr. Orren Boyle was swearing to me 
that he was going to deliver the steel next week, But whatever he 
managed to pour, it went to new customers of his, foi so^ne reason 
nobody would mention, only I heard it whispered that Iftcy were 
men with some sort of political pull. And now l can’t even get to 
Mr. Boyle at all. He’s in Washington, been there for ovet a month. 
And all his office tells me is just that they can’t help it, because they 
can’t get the ore.” 


198 



“Don't waste your time on them,” said Reardcn. “You’ll never 
get anything from that outfit.” 

“You know, Mr. Reardcn,” he said in the tone of a discovery 
which he could not quite bring himself to believe, “l think there’s 
something phony about the way Mr. Boyle runs his business. I can’t 
understand what he’s after. They’ve got half their furnaces idle, but 
last month there were all those big stones about Associated Steel in 
all the newspapers About their output? Why, no — about the won- 
derful housing project that Mr. Boyle’s just built for his workers. 
Last week, it was colored movies that Mr. Boyle sent to all the high 
schools, showing how steel is made and what great service it per- 
forms tor everybody. Now Mr. Boyle's got a radio program, they 
give talks about the importance of the steel industry to the country 
and they keep saying that we must preserve the steel industry as a 
whole. I don’t understand what he means by ‘as a whole.' ” 

“1 do. Forget it. He won’t get away with it.” 

“You know, Mr. Reardcn, 1 don't like people who talk too much 
about how everything they do is just for the sake of others It’s not 
true, and 1 don’t think it would be right if it were true. So I’ll say 
that what I need the steel tor is to save my own business. Because 
it's mine. Because if I had to close it ... oh well, nobody understands 
that nowadays.” 

”1 do ” 

“Yes . Y'es. 1 think you would . . , So. you see, that’s my first 
concern. But still, there aie my customers, too. They've dealt with 
me for years l hey Ye counting on me. It's just about impossible to 
get any soil of machinery anywhere. Do you know what it's getting 
to be like, out m Minnesota, when the farmers can't get tools, when 
machines break down in tile middle <>i the harvest season and there 
are no parts, no replacements . . . nothing but Mr. Orren Boyle's 
colored movies about ... Oh well . . . And then there are my 
workers, too. Some of them have been with us since my fathers 
time They've got no other place to go. Not now.” 

It was impossible, thought Reardcn. to squeeze more steel out of 
mills where eveiy iurnace, every hour and every ton were scheduled 
in advance lor urgent orders for the next six months. But . . . The 
John Halt Line, he thought. If he could do that, he could do 
anything. . . . He tell as it he wished to undertake ten new problems 
at once. He felt as it this were a world where nothing was impossible 
to him. 

“Look.” he said, reaching for the telephone, “let me check with 
my superintendent and see just what we’re pouring in the next few 
weeks. Maybe I’ll find a way to borrow a few tons from some of the 
orders and - ” 

Mi. Ward looked quickly away from him. but Reardcn had caught 
a glimpse of his face. It's so much lor him. thought Reardcn. and so 
little for me! 

He lifted the telephone receiver, but he had to drop it, because 
the door of his office flew open and Gwen Ives rushed in. 

It seemed impossible that Miss Ives should permit herself a breach 
of that kind, or that the calm of her face should look like an unnatu- 

199 



ral distortion, or that her eyes should seem blinded, or that her steps 
should sound a shred of discipline away from staggering. She said, 
"Excuse me for interrupting, Mr, Rearden.” but he knew that she 
did not see the office, did not see Mr. Ward, saw nothing but him. 
"I thought t must tell you that the Legislature has just passed the 
Equalization of Opportunity Bill ” 

It was the stolid Mr. Ward who screamed, ’Oh God, no! Oh, 
no!" — staring at Reardon. 

Rearden had leaped to his feel He stood unnaturally bent, one 
shoulder drooping fotward. It was only an instant Then he looked 
around him. as il regaining eyesight, said, "Excuse me," his glance 
including both Miss Ives and Mi, Ward, and sat down again. 

"We were not informed that the Bill had been brought to the 
floor, were we?" he asked, his voice controlled and dry. 

"No, Mr. Rearden. Apparently, it was a surprise move and it took 
them just torty-five minutes " 

"Have you heaid from Mouch 9 ” 

"No. Mr Rearden ” She stressed the no. Tl was the office hoy 
from the fifth floor who came running in to tell me that he’d just 
heard it on the radio. I called the newspapers to verily it. 1 tried to 
reach Mr. Mnuch in Washington. His office does not answer." 
"When did we hear from him last 9 ” 

"Ten days ago, Mr. Rearden." 

"All right. Thank you, Gwen. Keep trying to get his office " 
"Yes, Mr. Rearden." 

She walked out. Mr. Ward was on his teet. hat in hand He mut- 
tered, "1 guess Td better—” 

"Sit down!” Rearden snapped fiercely 
Mr. Ward obeyed, staring at him. 

"We had business to transact; didn't we 9 ” said Rearden. Mr. Ward 
amid not define the emotion that contorted Rearden 's mouth as he 
spoke. "Mr. Ward, what is it that the foulest bastards on earth de- 
nounce us fot. among other things’? Oh yes, for our motto ol ‘Business 
as usual ’ W'ell — business as usual. Mr. Ward!" 

He picked up the telephone receiver and asked for Ins superinten- 
dent. "Say. Pete . . . What? . . Yes, I’ve heard. Can it. We ll talk 
about that later. What 1 want to know is. could you let me have live 
hundred tons of steel, extra, above schedule, in the next few 
weeks? . . . Yes, I know ... 1 know it’s tough . . . Give me the 
dates and the figures.” He listened, rapidly jotting notes down on a 
sheet of paper. Then he said, "Right Thank you,” and hung up. 

He studied the figures for a tew' moments, making some brief 
calculations on the margin of the sheet. T hen he raised hi# head. 

"Ail right, Mr. Ward,” he said. "You will have your st$el in ten 

days/' < 

When Mr. Ward had gone, Rearden came into the antefoom, He 
said to Miss Ives, his voice normal, "Wire Fleming in Colorado. HeTl 
know why I have to cancel that option.” She inclined he| head, in 
fhe manner of a nod signifying obedience, She did not look at him. 

He turned to his next caller and said, with a gesture of snvitation 
toward his office, "How do you do. Come in.” 

200 



He would think of it later, he thought; one moves step bv step 
and one must keep moving. For the moment, with an unnatural 
clarity, with a brutal simplification that made it almost easy, his con- 
sciousness contained nothing but one thought: It must not stop me. 
The sentence hung alone, with no past and no future. He did not 
think of what it was that must not stop him, or why this sentence 
was such a crucial absolute. It held him and he obeyed He went step 
by step He completed his schedule of appointments, as scheduled. 

It was late when his last caller departed and he came out of his 
office. The rest ot his staff had gone home. Miss Ives sat alone at 
her desk in an empty room. She sat straight and stiff, her hands 
clasped tightly together in hot lap. Her head was not lowered, but 
held rigidly level, and het face seemed frozen. 'Fears were lunmng 
down her cheeks, with no sound, with no facial movement, against 
her resistance, beyond control. 

She saw him and said dryly, guiltily, m apology. *Tm sorry, Mr. 
Reardon/' not attempting the futile pretense ot hiding her face. 

He approached hei. “Thank >011," he said gently 

She looked up at him, astonished. 

He smiled ’But don't you think you're underestimating me, 
Gwen? Isn't it too soon to erv over me?" 

‘I could have taken the rest ot it." she whispered, “but they” — 
she pointed at the newspapeis on her desk “thcv're calling it a 
victory for anti -greed/’ 

He laughed aloud. "I can see where such a distortion of the En- 
glish language would make you furious/' he said. “But what else?” 

As she looked at him, her mouth relaxed a little. Ihe victim whom 
she could not protect was her onlv point of reassurance in a world 
dissolving around her 

He moved his hand gently across her forehead; it was an unusual 
break of formality for him, and a silent acknowledgment of the things 
at which he had not laughed. “Go home. Gwen. I won't need you 
tonight I'm going home myself in gist a little while. No, I don't want 
\ou to wait/' 

It was past midnight, when, shli sitting at his desk, bent over blue- 
prints iit the bridge for the John Gall f ine, he stopped his work 
abruptly, because emotion reached him in a sudden stab, not to be 
escaped any longer, as if a curtain of anesthesia had broken. 

He slumped down, halfway, still holding onto some shred of resis- 
tance, and sat, his chest pressed to the edge of the desk to stop him, 
his head hanging down, as if the only achievement still possible to 
him was not to let his head drop down on the desk. He sat that way 
tor a few moments, conscious of nothing but pain, a screaming pain 
without content or limit — he sat, not knowing whether it was in his 
mind or his body, reduced to the terrible ugliness of pain that 
stopped thought. 

In n few moments, U w<as over. He raised his head and sat up 
straight, quietly, leaning back against his chair. Now he saw? that in 
postponing this moment for hours* he had not been guilty of evasion: 
he had not thought of it, because there was nothing to think. 

Thought—- he told himself quietly — is a weapon one uses in order 

201 



to act. No action was possible. Thought is the tool by which one 
makes a choice. No choice was left to him. Thought sets one’s pur- 
pose and the way to reach it. In the matter of his life being tom 
piece by piece out of him, he was to have no voice, no purpose, no 
way. no defense. 

He thought of this in astonishment. He saw for the first time that 
he had never known fear because, against any disaster, he had held 
the omnipotent cure of being able to act. No, he thought, not an 
assurance of victory — who can ever have that? — only the chance to 
act, which is all one needs. Now he was contemplating, impersonally 
and for the first time, the real heart of terror: being delivered to 
destruction with one’s hands tied behind one’s back. 

Well, then, go on with your hands tied, he thought. Go on in 
chains. Go on. It must not stop you. . . But another voice was 

telling him things he did not want to hear, while he fought back, 
crying through and against it: There's no point in thinking of that . . . 
there’s no use . . . what for? . . . leave it alone! 

He could not choke it ofl. He sat still, over the drawings of the 
bridge for the John Galt Line and heard the things released by a 
voice that was part-sound, part-sight: They decided it without 
him. . . . They did not call tor him, they did not ask. they did not 
let him speak. . . . They were not bound even by the duty to let him 
know — to let him know that they had slashed part of his life away 
and that he had to be ready to walk on as a cripple. ... Of all those 
concerned, whoever they were, lor whichever reason, tor whatever 
need, he was the one they had not had to consider. 

The sign at the end of a long road said* Rcardcn Ore It hung 
over black tiers ot metal . , and over years and nights . . over a 
dock ticking drops of his blood away . . the blood he had given 
gladly, exultantly in payment for a distant day and a sign over a 
road . , . paid for with his eflort. his strength, his mind, his hope . . 
Destroyed at the whim of some men who sat and voted . . Who 
knows by wfiat minds? . . . Who knows whose will had placed them in 
power? -what motive moved them? — what was their knowledge - 
which one of them, unaided, could bring a chunk of ore out of the 
earth? . . , Destroyed at the whim of men whom he had never seen 
and who had never seen those tiers of metal . . . Destroyed, because 
they so decided, tty what light? 

He shook his head. Ihere are things one must not contemplate, 
he thought. There is an obscenity of evil which contaminates the ob- 
server. "There is a limit to what it is proper foi a man to see. He 
must not think of this, or look within it, or try to learn the nature 
of its roots. 

Feeling quiet and empty, he told himself that he would lie all right 
tomorrow. He would forgive himself the weakness of th^ night, it 
was like the tears one is permitted at a funeral, and then one learns 
how to live with an open wound or with a crippled factory. 

He got up and walked to the window. The mills seemel deserted 
and still; he saw feeble snatches of red above black fuiinels, long 
coils of steam, webbed diagonals of cranes and bridges. < 

He felt a desolate loneliness, of a kind he had never knetyn before. 

202 



He thought that Gwen ives and Mr. Ward could look to him for 
hope, for relief, for renewal of courage. To whom could he look for 
it? He, too, needed it. for once. He wished he had a friend who 
could be permitted to see him suffer, without pretense or protection, 
on whom he could lean for a moment, just to say, 4 Tm very tired,'' 
and tind a moment’s rest. Of all the men he knew, was there one 
he wished he had beside him now? He heard the answer in his mind, 
immediate and shocking: Francisco d’Anconia. 

His chuckle of anger brought him back. The absurdity of the long- 
ing jolted him into calm. That’s what you get, he thought, when you 
indulge yourself in weakness. 

He stood at the window, trying not to think. Bui he kept hearing 
words in his mind: Rearden Ore . . Keardcn Coal . . . Rearden 
Steel . . Rearden Metal . . What was the use? Why had he done 
it? Why should he ever want to do anything again? . . 

His first day on the ledges of the ore mines . , . The day when he 
stood in the wind, looking down at the ruins of a steel plant . . . 
The day when he stood here, in this office, at this window, and 
thought that a bridge could be made to carry incredible loads on 
just a tew bars of metal, if one combined a truss with an aich, if one 
built diagonal bracing with the top members curved to — 

He stopped and stood still. He had not thought of combining a 
truss with an arch, that day. 

In the next moment, he was at Ins desk, bending over it. with one 
knee on the seat ot the chair, with no time to think of sitting down, 
ho was drawing lines, ( uives. triangles, columns of calculations, indis- 
criminately on the blueprints, on the desk blotter, on somebody’s 
letters. 

And an hour later, he was vailing for a longdistance line, he was 
waiting for a phono to ring by a bed in a railway car on a siding* he 
was saying, “Dagny! That bridge of ours- throw in the asbean all 
the drawings l sent you. because . . What? . . . Oh, that? To hell 

with that! Never mind the looters and their laws! Forget it! Dagny. 
what do we care 1 Listen, you know the contraption you called the 
Rearden Truss, that you admired so much? it s not worth a damn. 
I've figured out a truss that will beat anything ever built! Your bridge 
wall carry four trains at once, stand three hundred years and cost 
you less than your cheapest culvert. I'll send you the di awing* in 
two days, but i wanted to tell you about it right now. You see* it's 
a matter of combining a truss with an arch. If we take diagonal 
bracing and . . What 7 ... I can't hear you. Have you caught a 
cold? . . What are you thanking me lor, as yet? Wait till I explain 
it to you.” 

Chapter VIII THE JOHN GALT LINE 

The worker smiled, looking at Eddie Willers across the table. 

“I fed like a fugitive,” said Eddie Willers. T guess you know why 
1 haven't been here for months?” He pointed at the underground cafe- 
teria. *Tm supposed to he a vice-president now. 'The Vice-President in 

203 



Charge of Operation. For God's sake, don’t take it seriously. I stood 
it as long as I could, and then 1 had to escape, if only for one 
evening, . . . The first time I came down here for dinner, after my 
alleged promotion, they all stared at me so much, I didn’t dare come 
back. Well, let them stare. You don't. Pm glad that it doesn’t make 
any difference to you. . . . No, I haven’t seen her for two weeks. 
But I speak to her on the phone every day, sometimes twice a 
day. . . . Yes, I know how she feels: she loves it. What is it we hear 
over the telephone —sound vibrations, isn’t it? Well, her voice sounds 
as if it were turning into light vibrations — if you know what 1 mean. 
She enjoys running that horrible battle single-handed and 
winning. ... Oh yes, she’s winning! Do you know why you haven’t 
read anything about the John Galt Line in the newspapers for some 
time? Because it’s going so well . . . Only . . . that Reardon Metal 
rail will be the greatest track ever built, but what will be the use, if 
we don't have any engines powerful enough to take advantage of it? 
Look at the kind of patched coal-burners we've got left — they can 
barely manage to drag themselves last enough tor old trolley-car 
rails. . . . Still, there's hope. The United Locomotive Works went 
bankrupt. That's the best break we’ve had in the last few weeks, 
because their plant has been bought by Dwight Sanders. He's a bril- 
liant young engineer who’s got the only good aircraft plant in the 
country. He had to sell the aircraft plant to his brother, in order to 
take over United Locomotive That’s on account ot the Equalization 
of Opportunity Bill. Sure, it's just a setup between them, but can 
you blame him 7 Anyway, we ll see Diesels coming out ot the United 
Locomotive Works now. Dwight Sanders will start things going. . , 
Yes, she’s counting on him Why do you ask that? . . Yes, he's 
crucially important to us right now. We’ve just signed a contract with 
him, foi the first ten Diesel engines he’ll build. When 1 phoned her 
that the contract was signed, she laughed and said. ‘You sec? Is 
there ever any reason to be afraid?' . , . She said that, because she 
knows — Pve» never told her, but she knows — that Pm afraid. . . . Yes, 
I am. ... I don't know ... 1 wouldn’t be afraid if I knew of what, 
( could do something about it. But this . . . Tell me, don’t you really 
despise me for being Operating Vice-President? . . . But don’t you 
see — that it's vicious 7 . . . What honor? 1 don’t know' what it is that 
1 really am: a clown, a ghost, an understudy or just a rotten stooge. 
When I sit in her office, m her chair, at her desk, 1 fed worse than 
that: I fed like a murderer. . . . Sure, I know that Pm supposed to 
be a stooge for her —, and that would be an honor —but . . . but I 
fed as if in some horrible way which I can’t quite grasp, Pm a stooge 
for Jim Taggart. Why should it be necessary* for her to have a stooge? 
Why does she have to hide? Why did they throw her out ot the 
building? Do you know that she had to move out into a (Jinky hole 
in the back alley, across from our Express and Baggage Entrance? 
You ought to take a look at it some time, that’s the offidb of John 
Galt, Inc. Yet everybody knows that it's she who’s still ruiining Tag- 
gart Transcontinental. Why does she have to hide the nfagnificent 
job she's doing 7 Why are they giving her no credit? Why are they 
robbing her of her achievement — with me as the receiver of stolen 

204 



goods? Why are they doing everything in their power to make it 
impossible for her to succeed, when she’s all they’ve got standing 
between them and destruction? Why are they torturing her in return 
for saving their lives? . . . What’s the matter with you? Why do you 
look at me like that? ... Yes, 1 guess you understand. . . . There’s 
something about it all that I can’t define, and it’s something evil. 
That’s why I’m afraid. ... I don’t think one can get away with it. . . . 
You know, it’s strange, but I think they know it, too, Jim and his 
crowd and all of them in the building. There’s something guilty and 
sneaky about the whole place. Guilty and sneaky — and dead. Taggart 
Transcontinental is now like a man who's lost his soul . . . who’s 
betrayed his soul. . . . No, she doesn’t care. Last time she was in 
New York, she came in unexpectedly — 1 was in my office, in her 
office —and suddenly the door opened and there she was. She came 
in, saying, ‘Mr. Willers, I’m looking for a job as a station operator, 
would you give me a chance?’ 1 wanted to damn them all, but I had 
to laugh, I was so glad to see her and she was laughing so happily. 
She had come straight from the airport — she wore slacks and a flying 
jacket — she looked wonderful —she'd got windburned, it looked like 
a suntan, just as if she'd returned from a vacation. She made me 
remain where 1 was, in her chair, and she sat on the desk and talked 
about the new bridge of the John Galt Line. . . . No. No, 1 never 
asked her why she chose that name ... 1 don’t know what it means 
to her. A sort of challenge, 1 guess ... I don’t know to whom . . . 
Oh, it doesn't matter, it doesn’t mean a thing, there isn’t any John 
Galt, but I wish she hadn't used it l don't like it, do you? . . . You 
do? You don’t sound very happy saying it.” 

* * 

The windows of the offices of the John Galt Line faced a dark 
alley. Looking up from her desk. Dagny could not see the sky. only 
the wall of a building rising past her range of vision. U was the side 
wall of the great skyscraper of Taggart Transcontinental. 

Her new headquarters were two rooms on the ground floor of a 
half-collapsed structure. The structure still stood, but its upper stories 
were boarded off as unsafe for occupancy. Such tenants as it shel- 
tered were half-bankrupt, existing, as it did, on the inertia of the 
momentum of the past. 

She liked her new place: it saved money. The rooms contained nt> 
superfluous furniture or people. The furniture had come from junk 
shops. The people were the best choice she could find. On her rare 
visits to New York, she had no time to notice the room where she 
worked; she noticed only that it served its purpose. 

She did not know what made her stop tonight and look at the thin 
streaks of rain on the glass of the window, at the wall of the building 
across the alley. 

ft was past midnight. Her small staff had gone. She was due at 
the airport at three a.m., to fly her plane back to Colorado. She had 
little left to do, only a few of Eddie’s reports to read. With the 
sudden break of the tension of hurrying, she stopped, unable to go 

205 



on. The reports seemed to require an effort beyond her power. It 
was too late to go home and sleep, too early to go to the airport. 
She thought: You're tired — and watched her own mood with severe, 
contemptuous detachment, knowing that it would pass. 

She had flown to New York unexpectedly, at a moment’s notice, 
leaping to the controls of her plane within twenty minutes after hear- 
ing a brief item in a news broadcast. The radio voice had said that 
Dwight Sanders had retired from business, suddenly, without reason 
or explanation. She had hurried to New York, hoping to find him 
and stop him. But she had felt, while flying across the continent, that 
there would be no trace of him to find. 

The spring rain hung motionless in the air beyond the window, 
like a thin mist. She sat. looking across at the open cavern of the 
Express and Baggage Entrance of the Taggart Terminal. There were 
naked lights inside, among the steel girders of the ceiling, and a lew 
piles of luggage on the worn concrete of the floor. The place looked 
abandoned and dead. 

She glanced at a jagged crack on the wall of her office. She heard 
no sound. She knew she was alone in the ruins of a building. It 
seemed as if she were alone in the city. She felt an emotion held 
back for years: a loneliness much beyond tins moment, beyond the 
silence of the room and the wet, glistening emptiness of the street: 
the loneliness of a gray wasteland where nothing was worth reaching: 
the loneliness of her childhood. 

She rose and walked to the window. By pressing her lace to the 
pane, she could see the whole of the Taggart Building, its lines con- 
verging abruptly to its distant pinnacle in the sky. She looked up at 
the dark window of the room that had been her office She felt as 
if she were in exile, never to return, as if she were separated from 
the building by much more than a sheet of glass, a curtain of rain 
and the span of a few months. 

She stood, in a room of crumbling plaster, pressed to the window- 
pane, lookftig up at the unattainable form ol everything she loved. 
She did not know the nature ot her loneliness. The only words that 
named it were: This is not the world 1 expected. 

Once, when she was sixteen, looking at a long stretch of Taggart 
track, at the rails that converged— like the lines of a skyscraper —to 
a single point in the distance, she had told Eddie Willers that she 
had always felt as if the rails were held in the hand of a man beyond 
the horizon — no, not her father or any of the men in the office — 
and some day she would meeL him. 

She shook her head and turned away from the window. 

She went back to her desk. She tried to reach tor the reports But 
suddenly she was slumped across the desk, her head on her arm. 
Don’t, she thought: but she did not move to rise, it mad$ no difter- 
encc, there was no one to see her. 

This was a longing she had never permitted herself ip acknowl- 
edge. She faced it now She thought: If emotion is one’s Response to 
the things the world has to offer, if she loved the rails, the building, 
and more: if she loved her love for them — there was slill one re- 
sponse, the greatest, that she had missed. She thought: To lind a 

206 



feeling that would hold, as their sum, as their final expression, the 
purpose of all the things she loved on earth ... To find a conscious- 
ness like her own, who would be the meaning of her world, as she 
would be of his . . . No, not Francisco d' Anconia, not Hank Rearden, 
not any man she had ever met or admired ... A man who existed 
only in her knowledge of her capacity for an emotion she had never 
felt, but would have given her life to experience . . . She twisted 
herself in a slow, faint movement, her breasts pressed to the desk; 
she felt the longing in her muscles, in the nerves of her body. 

Is that what you want? Is it as simple as that? she thought, but 
knew that it was not simple. There was some unbreakable link be- 
tween her love for her work and the desire of her body; as if one 
gave her the right to the other, the light and the meaning; as if one 
were the completion of the other— and the desire would never be 
satisfied, except by a being of equal greatness. 

Her face pressed to her arm, she moved her head, shaking it slowly 
in negation. She would never find it. Her own thought of what life 
could be like, was all she would ever have of the world she had 
wanted. Only the thought of it — and a tew rare moments, like a few 
lights reflected from it on her way-- “to know, to hold, to follow to 
the end . . , 

She raised her head. 

On the pavement of the alley, outside her window, she saw' the 
shadow ot a man who stood at the door of her office. 

The door was some steps away; she could not see him, or the 
street light beyond, only his shadow on the stones of the pavement. 
He stood perfectly still. 

He was so dose to the door, like a man about to enter, that she 
waited to hear him knock, instead, she saw the shadow jerk abruptly, 
as if he were jolted backward, then he turned and walked away. 
There was only the outline of his hat brim and shoulders left on the 
ground, when he stopped. The shadow lay still for a moment, wa- 
vered, and grew longer again as he came back. 

She felt no fear. She sat at her desk, motionless, watching in blank 
wonder. He stopped at the door, then backed away from it: he stood 
somewhere in the middle of the alley, then paced restlessly and 
stopped again. His shadow swung like an irregular pendulum across 
the pavement, describing the course of a soundless battle: it was a 
man fighting himself to enter that door or to escape. 

She looked on, with peculiar detachment. She had no power to 
react, only to observe. She wondered numbly, distantly: Who was 
he? Had he been watching her from somewhere in the darkness? 
Had he seen her slumped across her desk, in the lighted, naked 
window? Had he watched her desolate loneliness as she was now 
watching his? She felt nothing. They were alone in the silence of a 
dead city — it seemed to her that he was miles away, a reflection of 
suffering without identity, a fellow survivor whose problem was as 
distant to her as hers would be to him. He paced, moving out of 
her sight, coming back again. She sat, watching — on the glistening 
pavement of a dark alley — the shadow of an unknown torment. 

The shadow moved away once more. She waited. It did not return. 

207 



Then she leaped to her feet. She had wanted to see the outcome of 
the battle; now that he had won it— or lost — she was struck by the 
sudden, urgent need to know his identity and motive. She ran 
through the dark anteroom, she threw the door open and looked out. 

The alley was empty. The pavement went tapering off into the 
distance, like a band of wet mirror under a few spaced lights. There 
was no one in sight. She saw the dark hole of a broken window in 
an abandoned shop. Beyond it. there were the doors of a few room- 
ing houses. Across the alley, streaks of rain glittered under a light 
that hung over the black gap of an open door leading down to the 
underground tunnels of Taggart Transcontinental 

* + 

Reardon signed the papers, pushed them across the desk and 
looked away, thinking that he would never have to think of them 
again, wishing he were carried to the time when this moment would 
be far behind him. 

Paul Larkin reached for the papers hesitantly; he looked mgiatiat- 
ingly helpless. “It’s only a legal technicality. Hank/’ he said "You 
know that I’ll always consider these ore mines as yours.” 

Rearden shook his head slowly; it was just a movement of his neck 
muscles; his face looked immovable, as if he were speaking to a 
stranger. “No.” he said. “Hither l own a property or 1 don't.” 

“But . . . but you know that you can trust me. You don’t have to 
worry about your supply of ore. We’ve made an agreement. You 
know that you can count on me.” 

”1 don't know it. I hope I can.” 

“But I’ve given you my word.” 

“1 have never been at the mercy of anyone's word before.” 

“Why . . . wjhy do you say that? We’re friends I’ll do anything 
you wish. You’ll get my entire output. The mines are still yours— 
just as good as yours. You have nothing to tear. I’ll . , Hank, what’s 
the matter?” 

“Don’t talk/’ 

“But . . . but what's the matter?” 

“1 don't like assurances. I don’t want any pretense about how safe 
I am. I’m not. We have made an agreement which I can’t enforce. 
1 want you to know that 1 understand my position fully. If you intend 
to keep your word, don't talk about it, just do it.” 

“Why do you look at me as if it were my fault? You know how 
badly I feel about it. 1 bought the mines only because 1 thought it 
would help you out — I mean, l thought you'd rather sell them to a 
friend than to some total stranger. It’s not my fault. I don’t like that 
miserable Equalization Bill, I don’t know who’s behind it, I never 
dreamed they’d pass it, it was such a shock to me when they 

“Never mind.” 

“But I only — ” 

“Why do you insist on talking about it?” 

“I . . .” Larkin's voice was pleading. “I gave you the Hbst price. 
Hank. The law said ‘reasonable compensation/ My bid wits higher 
than anyone else’s.” 

Rearden looked at the papers still lying across the desk. He 

208 



thought of the payment these papers gave him for his ore mines. 
Two-thirds of the sum was money which Larkin had obtained as a 
loan from the government: the new law made provisions lor such 
loans “in order to give a fair opportunity to the new owners who 
have never had a chance/' Two-thirds of the rest was a loan he 
himself had granted to Larkin, a mortgage he had accepted on his 
own mines. . .And the government money, he thought suddenly, 
the money now given to him as payment for his property, where had 
that come irom? Whose work had provided it? 

“You don’t have to worry. Hank,” said Larkin, with that incom- 
prehensible. insistent note of pleading in his voice. “It’s just a 
paper formality.*' 

Rcardcn wondered dimly what it was that Larkin wanted from 
him. He felt lhat the man was waiting tor something beyond the 
physical I act of the sale, some words which he, Rcardcn. was sup- 
posed to pronounce, some action pertaining to mercy which he was 
expected to grant. Larkin's eyes, in this moment of his best tortune, 
had the sickening look ot a beggar. 

“Why should you be angrv. Hank? It’s only a new form of legal 
led tape. Just a new historical condition. Nobody can help it, if it’s 
a historical condition. Nobody can be blamed tor it. But there's, al- 
ways a way to get along Look at all the others They don’t mind. 
Ihev're — ” 

“ Ihev're setting up stooges whom thev control, to run the proper- 
ties extorted from them. I-- 4 * 

“Now why do vou want to use such words?” 

“I might as well tell you- -and I think vou know it — that I am not 
good at games ot that kind. I have neither the time nor the stomach 
to devise some form of blackmail in cider to tie you up and own 
my mines through you Ownership is a thing 1 don’t share. And I 
don** wish to hold it by the grace of your cowardice -by means of 
a constant struggle to outwit you and keep some threat over your 
head I don't do business that way and 1 don’t deal with .cowards, 
l he mines are yours. It you wish to give me first cull on all the ore 
produced, you will do so. If you wish to doubleeross me, it’s in 
your power.’* 

Larkin looked hurt “That's veiy unfair ot you.” he said: there 
was a dry little note ol righteous reproach in his voice. “I have never 
given you cause to distrust me.” He picked up the papers with a 
hasty movement. 

Rcardcn saw the papers disappear into Larkin's inside coat pocket. 
He saw the Hare ol the open coat, the wrinkles of a vest pulled 
tight over tlabbv bulges, and a stain of perspiration in the armpit of 
the shirt. 

1 Jnsutnmoned, the picture of a face seen twenty-seven years ago 
rose suddenly in hts mind. It was the face ot a preacher on a street 
corner he had passed, m a town he could not remember any longer. 
Only the dark walls of the slums remained in his memory, the rain 
of an autumn evening, and the righteous malice of the man's mouth, 
a small mouth stretched to yell into the darkness: *\ . . the noblest 

209 



ideal — that man live for the sake of his brothers, that the strong 
work for the weak, that he who has ability serve him who hasn’t . . ." 

Then he saw the boy who had been Hank Reardon at eighteen. 
He saw the tension of the face, the speed of the walk, the drunken 
exhilaration of the body, drunk on the energy of sleepless nights, 
the proud lift of the head, the clear, steady, ruthless eyes, the eyes 
of a man who drove himself without pity toward that which he 
wanted. And he saw what Paul Larkin must have been at that time - 
a youth with an aged baby’s face, smiling ingratiatingly, joylessly, 
begging to be spared, pleading with the universe to give him a 
chance. If someone had shown that youth to the Hank Rearden of 
that time and told him that this was to be the goal of his steps, the 
collector of the energy of his aching tendons, what would he have — 

It was not a thought, it was like the punch of a fist inside his skull. 
Then when he could think again, Rearden knew what the boy he 
had been would have felt: a desire to step on the obscene thing 
which was Larkin and grind every wet bit of it out of existence. 

He had never experienced an emotion of this kind. It took him a 
few moments to realize that this was what men called hatred. 

He noticed that rising to leave and muttering some sort of good- 
byes, Larkin had a wounded, reproachful, mouth-pinched look, as if 
he, Larkin, were the injured party. 

When he sold his coal mines to Ken Danagger. who owned the 
largest coal company in Pennsylvania, Rearden wondered why he 
felt as if it were almost painless. He fell no hatred. Ken Danagger 
was a man in his fifties, with a hard, closed face; he had started in 
life as a miner. 

When Rearden handed to him the deed to his new property, Dan- 
agger said impassively, "I don't betieve I've mentioned that any coal 
you buy from me, you’ll get it at cost." 

Rearden glanced at him, astonished. "It’s against the law," he said. 

“Who's going to find out what sort of cash I hand to you in your 
own living room?" 

“You’re talking about a rebate." 

“f am." 

“Thai's against two dozen laws They’ll sock you worse than me, 
if they catch you at it." 

“Sure. That's your protection — so you won't be left at the mercy 
of my good will" 

Rearden smiled; it was a happy smile, but he dosed his eyes as 
under a blow, Then he shook his head. “ Thanks," he said. “But I'm 
not one of them. I don’t expect anybody to work for me at cost." 

*i’m not one of them, either," said Danagger angrily, “took here, 
Rearden, don’t you suppose 1 know what I’m gelling, unearned? The 
money doesn’t pay you for it. Not nowadays." 

“You didn't volunteer to bid to buy my property. 1 asked you to 
buy it. I wish there had been somebody like you in the orjc business, 
to take over my mines. There wasn’t. If you want to do the a favor, 
don’t offer me rebates. Give me a chance to pay you higher prices, 
higher than anyone else will offer, suck me anything you wish, just 

210 



so I’ll he first to get the coal. I’ll manage my end of it. Only let me 
have the coal.” 

“You’ll have it.” 

Rearden wondered, for a while, why he heard no word from Wes- 
ley Mouch, His calls to Washington remained unanswered. Then he 
received a letter consisting of a single sentence which informed him 
that Mr. Mouch was resigning from his employ. Two weeks later, he 
read in the newspapers that Wesley Mouch had been appointed As- 
sistant Coordinator of the Bureau of Economic Planning and Na- 
tional Resources. 

Don’t dwell on any of it — thought Rearden, through the silence 
of many evenings, fighting the sudden access of that new emotion 
which he did not want to feel- -there is an unspeakable evil in the 
woild, you know it, and it’s no use dwelling on the details of it. You 
must work a little harder. Just a little harder. Don’t let it win. 

The beams and girders of the Rearden Metal bridge were coming 
daily out of the rolling mills, and were being shipped to the site of 
the John Galt Line, where the first shapes ol green-blue metal, swung 
into space to span the canyon, glittered in the first rays of the spring 
sun. He had no time for pain, no energy for anger. Within a few 
weeks, it was over; the blinding stabs of hatred ceased and did not 
return. 

He was back m confident self-control on the evening when he 
telephoned Eddie Willers “Eddie. I'm in New York, at the Wayne- 
Ealkland Come to have breakfast with me tomorrow morning. 
There’s something I'd like to discuss with you.” 

Eddie Willers went to the appointment with a heavy feeling of 
guilt. He had not recovered trom the shock of the Equalization of 
Opportunity Bill; it had left a dull ache within him. like the black- 
and-blue mark of a blow. He disliked the sight of the city: it now 
looked as if it hid the threat of some malicious unknown. He dreaded 
facing one of the Bill's victims: he fell almost as if he, Eddie Willers, 
shared the responsibility for it in some terrible way which he could 
not define. 

When he saw Rearden, the feeling vanished. There was no hint 
suggesting a victim in Reardon’s bearing. Beyond the windows of 
the hotel room, the spring sunlight of early morning sparkled on the 
windows of the city, the sky was a very pale blue that seemed young, 
the offices were still closed, and the city did not look as if it held 
malice, but as if it were joyously, hopefully ready to swing into ac- 
tion- in the same manner as Rearden. He looked refreshed by an 
untroubled sleep, he wore a dressing gown, he seemed impatient of 
the necessity to dress, unwilling to delay the exciting game of his 
business duties. 

“Good morning. Eddie. Sorry il I got you out so early. It’s the only 
time l had. Have to go back to Philadelphia right after breakfast. We 
cap talk while we're eating,” 

The dressing gown he wore was of dark blue flannel, with the 
white initials “H R” on the breast pocket. He looked young, relaxed, 
at home in this room and in the world. 

Eddie watched a waiter wheel the breakfast table into the room 

211 



with a swift efficiency that made him feel braced. He found himself 
enjoying the stiff freshness of the white tablecloth and the sunlight 
sparkling on the silver, on the two bowls of crushed ice holding 
glasses of orange juice: he had not known that such things could give 
him an invigorating pleasure. 

*i didn't want to phone Dagny long distance about this particular 
matter.” said Reardcn. “She has enough to do. We can settle it in 
a few minutes, you and I.” 

“If 1 have the authority to do it.” 

Rearden smiled. “You have ” He leaned forward across the table. 
“Eddie, what’s the financial state of Taggart Transcontinental at the 
moment? Desperate?” 

“Worse than that, Mr. Rearden.” 

“Arc you able to meet pay rolls 0 '* 

“Not quite. We've kept it out ot the newspapers, but I think every- 
body knows it. We’re in arrears all over the system and Jim is run- 
ning out of excuses.’’ 

“Do you know that your first payment for the Rearden Metal rail 
is due next week?'' 

“Yes. I know it.” 

“Well, let's agree on a moratorium. I’m going to give you an 
extension — you won't have to pay me anything until six months alter 
the opening of the John Galt Line.” 

Eddie Willers put down his cup of cot fee with a sharp thud. He 
could not say a word. 

Rearden chuckled. “What's the matter? You do have the authority 
to accept, don't you?” 

“Mr. Rearden ... I don’t know . . . what to say to \ou.” 

“Why. just ‘.okay’ is all that’s necessary.” 

“Okay, Mr. Rearden.” Eddie’s voice was baiely audible 

“I’ll draw up the papers and send them to you. You can tell Jim 
about it and have him sign them.” 

“Yes, Mr.' Rearden.” 

“I don’t like to deal with Jim. He'd waste two hours trying to 
make himself believe that he’s made me believe that he’s doing me 
a favor by accepting.” 

Eddie sat without moving, looking down at his plate. 

“What’s the matter 0 ” 

“Mr. Rearden, I’d like ... to say thank you . . . but there isn’t 
any form of it big enough to-—” 

“Look. Eddie. You've got the makings ot a good businessman, so 
you’d better get a few things straight, Ehere aren't any thank-you’s 
in situations of this kind. I'm not doing it for Taggart 1 ranscont men- 
tal. It’s a simple, practical, selfish matter on my part. Why should I 
collect my money from you now, when it might prove to be the 
death blow to your company? If your company were nr# good. I’d 
collect, and fast. I don’t engage in charity and l don't gamble on 
incompetents. But you’re still the best railroad in the country. When 
the John Galt Line is completed, you’ll be the soundest one finan- 
cially. So I have good reason to wait. Besides, you’re in trouble on 
account of my rail. I intend to see you win.” 

212 



“1 still owe you thanks, Mr. Rearden . . . for something much 
greater than charity.” 

“No. Don’t you see? I have just received a great deal of money . . . 
which I didn't want. I can’t invest it. It’s of no use to me whatever , . . 
So, in a way, it pleases me that 1 can turn that money against the 
same people in the same battle. They made it possible for me to 
give you an extension to help you fight them.” 

He saw Eddie wincing, as if he had hit a wound. “That’s what’s 
horrible about it!” 

“What?” 

“What they’ve done to you — and what you’re doing in return. I 
mean — ” He stopped. “Forgive me, Mr. Rearden. 1 know this is no 
way to talk business.” 

Rearden smiled. “Thanks, Eddie. 1 know what you mean. But 
forget it. To hell with them.” 

“Yes. Only . . . Mr. Rearden, may I say something to you? 1 know 
it’s completely improper and I’m not speaking as a vice-president.” 

“Go ahead.” 

“1 don’t have to tell you what your offer means to Dagny, to me, 
to every decent person on Taggart Transcontinental. You know it. 
And you know you can count on as. But . . . but 1 think it’s horrible 
that Jim Taggart should benefit, loo — that you should be the one to 
save him and people like him. after they 

Rearden laughed. “Eddie, what do we care about people like him? 
We’re driving an express, and they’re riding on the roof, making a 
lot of noise about being leaders. Why should we care? We have 
enough power to carry them along- haven’t we?” 

+ * 

“It won’t stand.” 

Hie summer sun made blotches of lire on the windows of the city, 
and glittering sparks in the dust of the streets. Columns of heal 
shimmered through the air, rising from the roofs to the white page 
of the calendar. The calendar's motor ran on, marking off the last 
days of June: 

“It won’t stand,” people said “When they run the first train on 
the John Galt Line, the rail will split. They’ll never get to the bridge. 
If they do, the bridge will collapse under the engine,” 

From the slopes of Colorado, freight trains roiled down the track 
of the Phoenix- Durango, north to Wyoming and the main line of 
Taggart Transcontinental, south to New Mexico and the main line 
of the Atlantic Southern. Strings of tank cars went radiating in all 
directions from the Wyatt oil fields to industries in distant states. No 
one spoke about them. To the knowledge of the public, the tank 
trains moved as silently as rays and, as rays, they were noticed only 
when they became the light of electric lamps, the heat of furnaces, 
the movement of motors; but as such, they were not noticed, they 
were taken for granted. 

The Phoenix- Durango Railroad was to end operations on July 25. 
“Hanlfr Rearden is a greedy monster,” people said. “Look at the 
fortune he’s made. Has he ever given anything in return? Has he 
ever known any sign of social conscience? Money, that’s all he’s 

213 



after. Hell do anything for money. What does he care if people lose 
their lives when his bridge collapses?’* 

“The Taggarts have been a band of vultures for generations,” 
people said, ‘it’s in their blood. Just remember that the founder of 
that family was Nat Taggart, the most notoriously anti-social scoun- 
drel that ever lived, who bled the country white to squeeze a fortune 
for himself. You can be sure that a Taggart won’t hesitate to risk 
people’s lives in order to make a profit They bought inferior rail, 
because it’s cheaper than steel— what do they care about calastio- 
phes and mangled human bodies, after they've collected the fares?” 

People said it because other people said it. They did not know 
why it was being said and heard everywhere. They did not give or 
ask for reasons, “Reason,” Dr. Pritchett had told them, “is the most 
naive of all superstitions.” 

“The source of public opinion?” said Claude Slagenhop in a radio 
speech. “There is no source of public opinion. Jt is spontaneously 
general. It is a reflex of the collective instinct of the collective mind.” 

Orren Boyle gave an interview to Globe , the news magazine with 
the largest circulation. The interview was devoted to the subject of 
the grave social responsibility of metallurgists, stressing the fact that 
metal performed so many crucial tasks where human lives depended 
on its quality. “One should not. it seems to me, use human beings 
as guinea pigs in the launching of a new product,” he said. He men- 
tioned no names. 

“Why, no, I don’t say that that bridge will collapse,” said the chief 
metallurgist of Associated Steel, on a television program. “I don't 
say it at all. I just say that if I had any children. I wouldn't let them 
ride on the first train that's going to cross that bridge. But it’s only 
a personal preference, nothing more, just because l*m overly lond 
of children.” 

“I don't claim that the Rearden-Taggart contraption will collapse,” 
wrote Bertram Scudder in Pie Future “Maybe it will and maybe it 
won’t. That’s not the important issue. The important issue is- what 
protection does society have against the arrogance, selfishness and 
greed of two unbridled individualists, whose records aie conspicu- 
ously devoid of any public-spirited actions? These two, apparently, 
are willing to stake the lives of their fellow men on their own con- 
ceited notions about their powers of judgment, against the over- 
whelming majority opinion of recognized experts. Should society 
permit it? If that thing dives collapse, won’t it be too late to take 
precautionary measures? Won’t it be like locking the barn after the 
horse has escaped? It has always been the belief of this column that 
certain kinds of horses should be kept bridled and locked, on general 
social principles.” 

A group that called itself “Committee of Disinterested Citizens” 
collected signatures on a petition demanding a year's study of the 
John Galt Line by government experts before the first train was 
allowed to run. The petition staled that its signers had n|> motive 
other than “a sense of civic duty.” The fir's! signalmen wferc those 
of Balph Tubank and Mort Liddy. The petition was givefc a great 
deal of space and comment in all the newspapers, Tire consideration 

214 



it received was respectful, because it came from people who were 
disinterested. 

No space was given by the newspapers to the progress of the 
construction of the John Galt l ine. No reporter was scat to look at 
the scene. "Hie general policy of the press had been stated by a 
famous editor five years ago. ”'Hiere are no objective facts/’ he had 
said, -‘Every report on facts is only somebody’s opinion. It is, there- 
fore, useless to write about facts.” 

A few businessmen thought that one should think about the possi- 
bility that there might be commercial value in Rearden Metal. They 
undertook a survey of the question. They did not hire metallurgists 
to examine samples, nor engineers to visit the site of construction. 
They took a public poll, fen thousand people, guaranteed to repre- 
sent every existing kind of brain, were asked the question. “Would 
you ride on the John Galt Line?” The answer, overwhelmingly, was: 
“No, sir-ree!” 

No voices were heard in public in defense of Rearden Metal. And 
nobody attached significance to the fact that the stock of Taggart 
Transcontinental was rising on the market; very slowly, almost fur- 
tively. There were men who watched and played sate. Mr. Mowen 
bought Taggart stock in the name of his sister. Ben Nealy bought it 
in the name of a cousin. Paul Larkin bought it under an alias. “1 
don’t believe in raising controversial issues,” said one of these men. 

“Oh, yes. of course, the construction is moving on schedule,” said 
James Taggart, shrugging, to his Board of Directors “Oh yes, you 
may feel full confidence. My dear sister does not happen to be a 
human being, but just an internal combustion engine, so one must 
not wonder at her success.” 

When James Taggart heard a rumor that some bridge girders had 
split and crashed, killing three workmen, he leaped to his feet and 
ran to his secretary’s office, ordering him to call Colorado. He 
wailed, pressed against the secretary’s desk, as if seeking protection: 
his eyes had the unfocused look, of panic. Vet his mouth moved 
suddenly into almost a smile and he said, “I’d give anything to see 
Henry Rearden ’s face right now.” When he heard that the mmor 
was false, he said, “Thank God!” But his voice had a note of 
disapixnntment. 

“Oh well!” said Philip Rearden to his friends, hearing the same 
rumor. “Maybe he can fail, loo. once in a while. Maybe my great 
brother isn’t as great as he thinks." 

“Darling,” said Lillian Rearden to her husband, “I fought for you 
yesterday, at a tea where the women were saying that Dagny Taggart 
is your mistress. . . . Oh, for heaven’s sake, don’t look at me like 
that! 1 know it’s preposterous and I gave them hell for it. It’s just 
that those silly bitches can’t imagine any other reason why a woman 
would take such a stand against everybody for the sake of your 
Metal. Of course, l know better than that. 1 know that the Taggart 
woman is perfectly sexless and doesn't give a damn about you— and, 
darling, I know that if you ever had the courage for anything of the 
sort, ’which you haven’t, you wouldn’t go for an adding machine in 

215 



tailored suits, you’d go for some blond, feminine chorus girl who — 
oh, but Henry, I’m only joking!— <lon’t look at me like that!” 

“Dagny,” James Taggart said miserably, “what’s going to happen 
to us? Taggart Transcontinental has become so unpopular!” 

Dagny laughed, m enjoyment of the moment, any moment, as if 
the undercurrent of enjoyment was constant within her and little was 
needed to tap it. She laughed easily, her mouth relaxed and open. 
Her teeth were very white against her sun-scorched face. Her eyes 
had the look, acquired m open country, of being set for great dis- 
tances. On her last tew visits to New York, he had noticed that she 
looked at him as if she did not sec him. 

“What are we going to do? The public is so overwhelmingly 
against us!” 

“Jim, do you remember the story they tell about Nat T aggart? He 
said that he envied only one of his competitors, the one who said 
The public be damned!' He wished he had savd it.” 

In the summer days and in the heavy stillness of the evenings of 
the city, there were moments when a lonely man or woman — on a 
park bench, on a street corner, at an open window — would see in a 
newspaper a brief mention of the progress ot the John Galt Line, 
and would look at the city with a sudden stab of love. They were 
the very young, who felt that it was the kind of event they longed 
to see happening in the world— or the very old, who had seen a 
world in which such events did happen. They did not care about 
railroads, they knew' nothing about business, they knew only that 
someone was fighting against great odds and winning. They did not 
admire the fighters’ purpose, they believed the voices of public opin- 
ion— and yet, when they read that the Line was growing, they felt a 
moment’s sparkle and wondered why it made theii own problems 
seem easier. 

Silently unknow n to everyone except to the freight yard of Taggart 
Transcontinental in Cheyenne and the office of the John Galt Line 
in the dark alley freight was rolling in and orders for cars were piling 
up — for the first train to run on the John Galt Line. Dagny Taggart 
had announced that the first train would be not a passengei express 
loaded with celebrities and politicians, as was the custom, but a 
freight special. 

"Hie freight came from farms, from lumber yards, from mines all 
over the country, from distant places whose last means of survival 
were the new factories of C olorado. No one wrote about these ship- 
pers, because they were men who were not disinterested. 

The Phoenix-Durango Railroad was to close on July 25. The first 
train of the John Galt Line was to run on July 22. 

“Well, it’s like this. Miss 1 aggart.” said the delegate ol the Union 
of Locomotive Engineers. T don't think we re going to allow you 
to run that train?' 

Dagny sat at her battered desk, against the blotched wall* of her 
office. She said, without moving, “Get out of here.” 

It was a sentence the man had never heard in the polished! offices 
of railroad executives. He looked bewildered. *i came to tell you — ” 

“If you have anything to say to me, start over again.” 

216 



“What?” 

“Don’t tell me what you’re going to allow me to do.” 

“Well, 1 meant we’re not going to allow our men to run your 
train.” 

“That's different.” 

"Well, that’s what we’ve decided.” 

“Who’s decided, it?” 

“The committee. What you’re doing is a violation of human rights. 
You can’t torce men to go out to get killed — when that bridge col- 
lapses just to make money for you.” 

She searched for a sheet of blank paper and handed it to him. 
“Put it down in writing,” she said, “and we’ll sign a contract to 
that effect.” 

“What contract?” 

“That no member ot your union will ever be employed to run an 
engine on the John Galt Line ” 

“Why . . . wait a minute ... I haven’t said — *’ 

“You don’t want to sign such a contract?” 

“No 1--” 

“Why not. since you know that the bridge is going to collapse?” 
“I only want — ” 

“I know what you want. You want a stranglehold on your men 
by means of the jobs which / give them- -and on me, by means of 
your men. You want me to provide the jobs, and you want to make 
it impossible for me to have any jobs to provide. Now I'll give you 
a choice. That train is going to be run. You have no choice about 
that. But you can choose whether it’s going to be run by one of your 
men or not. If you choose not to let them, the train will still run. if 
1 have to drive the engine myself. Then, if the bridge collapses, there 
won't be any railroad left in existence, anyway. But if it doesn’t 
collapse, no member of your union will ever get a job on the John 
Galt Line if you think that ! need your men more than they need 
me, choose accordingly. If you know that I can run an engine, but 
they can’t build a railroad, choose according to that. Now arc you 
going to forbid your men to run that train?” 

“I didn’t say we'd torbid it. 1 haven't said anything about forbid- 
ding. But . . . but you can't force men to risk their lives on something 
nobody’s ever tried before.” 

“I’m not going to force anyone to take that run/' 

“What are you going to do?” 

“f’m going to ask for a volunteer.” 

“And if none of them volunteers?” 

“Then it will be my problem, not yours.” 

“Well, let me tell you that I’m going to advise them to refuse,” 
“Go ahead. Advise them anything you wish. Tell them whatever 
you like. But leave the choice to them. Don’t try to forbid it,” 
file notice that appeared in every roundhouse of the Taggart system 
was signed “Kdwin WiUers, Vice-President in Charge of Operation.” It 
asked engineers, who were willing to drive the first train on the John 
Galt Line, so to inform the office of Mr, Willers. not later than 
eleven a.m. of July 15. 


217 



It was a quarter of eleven, on the morning of the fifteenth, when 
the telephone rang in her office. It was Eddie, calling from high up 
in the Taggart Building outside her window. "Dagny, 1 think you’d 
better come over.’' His voice sounded queer. 

She hurried across the. street, then down the marble-floored halls, 
to the door that still carried the name "Dagny Taggart” on its glass 
panel. She pulled the door open. 

The anteroom of the office was full. Men stood jammed among 
the desks, against the walls. As she entered, they took their hats olf 
in sudden silence. She saw the graying heads, the muscular shoulders, 
she saw the smiling faces of her staff at their desks and the face of 
Eddie Willers at the end of the room. Everybody knew that nothing 
had to be said. 

Eddie stood by the open door of her office. The crowd parted to 
let her approach him. He moved his hand, pointing at the room, 
then at a pile of letters and telegrams. 

“Dagny. every one of them,” he said, "Every engineer on Taggart 
Transcontinental. Those who could, came here, some from as far as 
the Chicago Division.” He pointed at the mail. "There’s the rest of 
them. To be exact, there's only three I haven’t heard from: one’s on 
a vacation in the north woods, one’s in a hospital, and one’s in jail 
for reckless driving — of his automobile.” 

She looked at the men She saw the suppressed grins on the sol- 
emn faces. She inclined her head, in acknowledgment. She stood for 
a moment, head bowed, as if she were accepting a verdict, knowing 
that the verdict applied to her, to every man in the room and to the 
world beyond the walls of the building 

“Thank you,” she said. 

Most of the men had seen her many times. Looking at her, as she 
raised her head, many of them thought — in astonishment and for the first 
time — that the face of their Operating Vice-President was the face of 
a woman and that it was beautiful. 

Someone in the back of the crowd cried suddenly, cheerfully, "To 
hell with Jim Taggart!” 

An explosion answered him. The men laughed, they cheered, they 
broke into applause. The response was out of all proportion to the 
sentence. But the sentence had given them the excuse they needed. 
They seemed to be applauding the speaker, in insolent defiance of 
authority. But everyone in the room knew who it was that they 
were cheering. 

She raised her hand. "We re too early,” she said, laughing. "Wail 
till a week from today. That’s when we ought to celebrate. And 
believe me. wc will!” 

They drew lots for the run. She picked a folded slip of paper from 
among a pile containing all their names. The winner was not in the 
room, but he was one of the best men on the system, Paf Logan, 
engineer of the Taggart Comet on the Nebraska Division. , 

“Wire Pat and tell him he’s been demoted to a freight,” jjshe stud 
to Eddie. She added casually, as if it were a last-moment decision, 
but it fooled no one, “Oh yes, tell him that I’m going to iide with 
him in the cab of the engine on that run.” ' 

218 



An old engineer beside her grinned and said, “I thought you 
would. Miss Taggart.*’ 

* * 

Rcarden was in New York on the day when Dagny telephoned 
him from her office. “Hank, I’m going to have a press conference 
tomorrow.” 

He laughed aloud. "No!” 

“Yes.” Her voice sounded earnest, hut, dangerously, a bit too 
earnest. “The newspapers have suddenly discovered me and arc ask- 
ing questions. I’m going to answer them.” 

“Have a good time.” 

“1 will. Are you going to be in town tomorrow? I’d like to have 
you in on it.” 

“Gkav. I wouldn’t want to miss it.” 

The reporters who came to the press conference in the office of 
the John Galt Line were young men who had been trained to think 
that their job consisted of concealing from the world the nature of 
its events. It was their daily duty to serve as audience for some 
public figure who made utterances about the public giWKl in phrases 
carefully chosen to convey no meaning, ft was their daily job to sling 
words together in any combination they pleased, so long as the words 
did not fall into a sequence saying something specific. They amid 
riot understand the interview now being given to them. 

Dagny Taggart sal behind her desk in an office that looked like a 
slum basement. She wore a dark blue suit with a white blouse, beau- 
< dully tailored, suggesting an air of formal, almost military elegance. 
She sal straight, and her manner was severely dignified, just a shade 
too dignified. 

Rcarden sat in a comer of the room, sprawled across a broken 
armchair, his long legs thrown over one of its arms, his body leaning 
against the other. His manner was pleasantly informal, just a bit 
too informal 

In the clear, monotonous voice of a military report, consulting no 
papers, looking straight at the men, Dagny recited the technological 
facts about the John Cialf Line, giving exact figures on the nature of 
the rail, the capacity of the bridge, the method of construction, the 
costs. Then, m the drv tone of a banker, she explained the financial 
prospects of the Line and named the large profits she expected to 
make. “ Ibat is all,” she said. 

“AH?” said one of the reporters. “Aren’t you going to give us a 
message for the public?” 

“ I hat was mv message.” 

“Rut hell —I mean, aren’t you going to defend yourself*” 

“Against what?" 

“Don’t you want to tell us something to justify your Line?” 

“I have.” 

A man with a mouth shaped as a permanent sneer asked, “Well, 
what I want to know, as Bertram Scudder stated, is what protection 
do we have against your line being no good?” 

“Don’t ride on it.” 


219 



Another asked, 44 Aren’t you going to tell us your motive for build* 
ing that Line?” 

“1 have told you; the profit which 1 expect to make.” 

44 Oh, Miss Taggart, don’t say that!” cried a young boy. He was 
new, he was still honest about his job, and he felt that he liked 
Dagny Taggart, without knowing why. “That’s the wrong thing to 
say. That’s what they’re all saying about you.” 

“Are they?” 

“Tm sure you didn’t mean it the way it sounds and . . . and I’m 
sure you’ll want to clarify it." 

“Why, yes, if you wish me to. The average profit of tailroads has 
been two per cent of the capital invested. An industry that docs so 
much and keeps so little, should consider itself immoral. As I have 
explained, the cost of the John Galt Line in relation to the traffic 
which it will carry makes me expect a profit of not less than fifteen 
per cent on our investment. Of course, any industrial profit above 
four per cent is considered usury nowadays. 1 shall, nevertheless, do 
my best to make the John Galt Line earn a profit ol twenty per cent 
for me. if possible. That was my motive for building the Line. Have 
I made myself clear now?” 

The boy was looking at her helplessly. “You don't mean, to earn 
a profit for vow. Miss Taggart? You mean, for the small stockholders, 
of course?” he prompted hopefully. 

“Why, no. I happen to be one of the largest stockholders of Tag- 
gart Transcontinental, so my share of the profits will be one of the 
largest. Now, Mr Rearden is in a much more fortunate position, 
because he has no stockholders to share with— or would you rather 
make your own statement. Mr Rearden 4 ’” 

“Yes. gladly." said Rearden. ‘inasmuch as the formula of Rearden 
Metal is my own personal secret, and in view of the fact that the 
Metal costs much less to produce than you boys can imagine, I expect 
to skin the public to the tune of a profit of twenty-five per cent in 
the next few -years.” 

“What do you mean, skin the public, Mr. Rearden?” asked the 
boy. "If it’s true, as I’ve read in your ads. that your Metal will last 
three times longer than any other and at halt the price, wouldn’t the 
public be getting a bargain?" 

"Oh, have you noticed that?” said Rearden. 

“Do the two of you realize you're talking for publication?" asked 
the man with the sneer. 

“But, Mr. Hopkins,” said Dagny. in polite astonishment, “is there 
any reason why we would talk to you, if it weren’t for pubheation?" 

“Do you want us to quote all the things you said?” 

“I hope I may trust you to be sure and quote them. Would you 
oblige me by taking this down verbatim?” She paused to | see their 
pencils ready, then dictated: “Miss Taggart says — quote — l ^expect to 
make a pile of money on the John Galt Line. 1 will have famed it. 
Close quote. Thank you so much.” 1 

“Any questions, gentlemen?” asked Rearden, 

There were no questions. 

“Now J must tell you about the opening of the John Cldt Line,” 

220 



said Dagny. '‘The first train will depart from the station of Taggart 
Transcontinental in Cheyenne, Wyoming, at four p.m, on July twenty- 
second. It will be a freight special, consisting of eighty cars. It will 
be driven by an eight-thousand-horsepower, four-unit Diesel locomo- 
tive— which I’m leasing from Taggart Transcontinental for the occa- 
sion. It will run non-stop to Wyatt Junction, Colorado, traveling at 
an average speed of one hundred miles per hour. 1 beg your par- 
don?” she asked, hearing the long, low sound of a whistle. 

‘What did you say, Miss Taggart?” 

“I said, one hundred miles per hour — grades, curves and all.” 

“But shouldn’t you cut the speed below normal rather than . . . 
Miss Taggart, don’t you have any consideration whatever for pub- 
lic opinion?” 

“But 1 do, If it weren’t for public opinion, an average speed of 
sixty -five miles per hour would have been quite sufficient.” 

“Who’s going to run that train?” 

“I had quite a bit of trouble about that. All the Taggart engineers 
volunteered to do it. ,So did the firemen, the brakemen and the 
conductors. We had to draw lots for every job on the train’s crew. 
The engineer will be Pat Logan, of the Taggart Comet, the fireman — 
Ray McKim. I shall ride in the cab of the engine with them.” 

“Not really!” 

“Please do attend the opening. It’s on July twenty-second. The 
piess is most eagerly invited Contrary to my usual policy, 1 have 
become a publicity hound. Really. I should like to have spotlights, 
radio microphones and television cameras. I suggest that you plant 
a few cameras around the bridge. T he collapse of the bridge would 
give you some interesting shots.” 

“Miss Taggart,” asked Rearden, “why didn't you mention that I’m 
going to ride in that engine, loo*” 

She looked at him across the loom, and for a moment they were 
alone, holding each othet’s glance 

“Yes, ot course. Mr. Rearden,” she answered. 

♦ * 

She did not see him again until they looked at each other across 
the platform of the Taggart station in Cheyenne, on July 22. 

She did not look for anyone when she stepped out on the platform; 
she felt as if her senses had merged, so that she could not distinguish 
the sky, the sun or the sounds of an enormous crowd, but perceived 
only a sensation of shock and light. 

Yet he was the first person she saw, and she could not tell for 
how long a time he was also the only one. He stood by the engine 
ol the John Galt train, talking to somebody outside the field of her 
consciousness. He was dressed in gray slacks and shut, he looked 
like an expert mechanic, but he was stared at by the faces around 
him, because he was Hank Rearden of Rearden Steel. High above 
him, she saw the letters TT on the silver front of the engine. The 
lines of the engine slanted back, aimed at space. 

There was distance and a crowd between them, but his eyes moved 
to her the moment she came out. They looked at each other and 
she knew that he fell as she did. This was not to be a solemn venture 

221 



through the air, far at the end, she moved her arm in answering 
signal. 

Rearden, Logan and McKim stood silently, as if at attention, let- 
ting her be first to get aboard. As she started up the rungs on the 
side of the engine, a reporter thought ot a question he had not asked. 

“Miss Taggart," he called after her, “who is John Galt?" 

She turned, hanging onto a metal bat with one hand, suspended 
for an instant above the heads of the crowd 

“WV are!" she answered. 

Logan followed her into the cab. then McKim: Reardon went last, 
then the door of the engine was shut, with the tight finality of 
sealed metal. 

The lights, hanging on a signal bridge against the sky. were green. 
There were gieen lights between the tracks, low over the ground, 
dropping otf into the distance where the rails turned and a green 
light stood at the curve, against leaves of a summer green that looked 
as if they, loo. were lights. 

Two men held a white silk ribbon stretched across the track in 
front of the engine. The) were the superintendent ot the Colorado 
Division and Nealy's chief engineer, who had remained on the job 
Eddie Willers was to cut the ribbon they held and thus to open the 
new line. 

The photographers posed him carefully, scissors in hand, his back 
to the engine He would icpeat the ceremony two or three times, 
they explained, to give them a choice ot shots; they had a fresh bolt 
of ribbon ready. He was about to comply, then stopped. “No," he 
said suddenly, “It’s not going to be a phony " 

In a voice of quiet authority, the voice of a vice-president, he 
ordered, pointing at the cameras, “Stand back - way back. Take one 
shot when I cut it. then get out of the way. fast " 

They obeyed, moving hastily farther down the track. There was 
only one minute left. Eddie turned his back to the cameras and stood 
between the* rails, facing the engine He held the scissors ready over 
the white ribbon. He took his hat off and tossed it aside He was 
looking up at the engine. A faint wind stirred his blond hair l he 
engine was a great silver shield bearing the emblem of Nat Taggart, 

Eddie Willers raised his hand as the hand of the station clock 
reached- the instant of four 

“Open her up, Pat!" he aided. 

In the moment when the engine started forward, he cut the while 
ribbon and leaped out of the way. 

From the side track, he saw the window of the aib go b> and 
Dagny waving to him »n an answering salute Then the engine was 
gone, and he stood looking across at the crowded platfornji that kept 
appearing and vanishing as the freight ears clicked past hjm. 

*. * 

The green-blue rails ran to meet them, like two jets sh$t out ot a 
single point beyond the curve of the earth, The aossties jroelted, as 
they approached, into a smooth stream rolling down junder the 
wheels, A blurred streak dung to the side of the engine, low over 
the ground. Frees and telegraph poles sprang into sight abruptly and 

224 



went by as if jerked back. The green plains stretched past, in a 
leisurely flow. At the edge of the sky, a long wave of mountains 
reversed the movement and seemed to follow the train. 

She fell no wheels under the floor. The motion was a smooth flight 
on a sustained impulse, as if the engine hung above the rails, riding 
a current. She felt no speed, it seemed strange that the green lights 
of the signals kept coming at them and past, every few seconds. She 
knew that the signal lights were spaced two miles apart. 

The needle on the speedometer in front of Pat Logan stood at 
one hundred. 

She sat in the fireman's chair and glanced across at Logan once in 
a while. He sat slumped forward a Tittle, relaxed, one hand resting 
lightly on the throttle as if by chance; but his eyes were fixed on the 
track ahead. He had the ease ol an expert, so confident that it seemed 
casual, but it was the ease of a tremendous concentration, the concen- 
tration on one's task that has the ruthlessness of an absolute, Ray 
McKim sat on a bench behind them. Reardcn stood in the middle 
of the cab. 

He stood, hands in pockets, feet apart, braced against the motion, 
looking ahead. Inhere was nothing he could now care to see by the 
side of the track: he was looking at the rail. 

Ownership -she thought, glancing back at him — weren't there 
those who knew nothing of its nature and doubted its reality? No, 
it was not made of papers, seals, grants and permissions. There it 
was in his eyes. 

The sound lilling the cab seemed part of the space they were 
crossing. It held the low drone of the motors- the sharper clicking 
of the many parts that rang in varied cries of metal— and the high, 
ihm chimes of trembling glass panes. 

Things streaked past- -a water tank, a tree, a shanty, a grain silo. 

I hey had a windshield-wiper motion: they were rising, describing a 
curve and dropping back. The telegraph wires ran a race with the 
train, rising and falling from pole to pole, in an even rhythm, like 
the cardiograph record of a steady heartbeat written across the sky. 

She looked ahead, at the ha/e that melted rail and distance, a 
ha/c that amid rip apart at any moment to some shape of disaster. 
She wondered why she felt safer than she had ever felt in a car 
behind the engine, safer here, where it seemed as if, should an obsta- 
cle rise, her breast and the glass shield would be first to smash against 
it. She smiled, grasping the answer it was the security of being first, 
with full sight and full knowledge of one’s course — not the blind 
sense of being pulled into the unknown by some unknown power 
ahead. It was the greatest sensation of existence: not to trust, but 
to know. 

The glass sheets of the cab's windows made the spread of the 
fields seem vaster: the earth looked as open to movement as it was 
to sight. Yet nothing was distant and nothing was out of reach. She 
had barely grasped the sparkle of a lake ahead— and in the next 
instant she was beside it, then past. 

It "was a strange foreshortening between sight and touch, she 
thought, between wish and fulfillment, between— the words clicked 

225 



sharply in her mind after a startled stop — between spirit and body. 
First, the virion — then the physical shape to express it. First, the 
thought — then the purposeful motion down the straight line of a 
single track to a chosen goal. Could one have any meaning without 
the other? Wasn't it evil to wish without moving — or to move with- 
out aim? Whose malevolence was it that crept through the world, 
struggling to break the two apart and set them against each other? 

She shook her head. She did not want to think or to wonder why 
the world behind her was as it was. She did not care. She was flying 
away from it, at the rate of a hundred miles an hour. She leaned to 
the open window by her side, and felt the wind of the speed blowing 
her hair off her forehead. She lay back, conscious of nothing but the 
pleasure it gave her 

Yet her mind kept racing. Broken bits of thought flew past her 
attention, like the telegraph poles by the track. Physical pleasure? — 
she thought. This is a train made of steel . . . running on rails of Reardon 
Metal . . . moved by the energy of burning oil and electric genetators . . . 
ifs a physical sensation of physical movement through space . . . but 
is that the cause and the meaning of what I now feel? , . l>o they call it 
a low, animal joy — this feeling that I would not care if the rail did 
break to bits under us now— it won't — but 1 wouldn't care, because 
I have experienced this? A low, physical, material, degrading plea- 
sure of the body? 

She smiled, her eyes closed, the wind streaming through her hair 

She opened her eyes and saw that Rearden stood looking down 
at her. It was the same glance with which he had looked at the rail. 
She felt her power of volition knocked out by some single, dull blow 
that made her unable to move. She held his eyes, lying back m her 
chair, the wind pressing the thin cloth of her shirt to her body. 

He looked away, and she turned again to the sight of the earth 
tearing open before them. 

She did not want to think, but the sound of thought went on, like 
the drone of the motors under the sounds of the engine. She looked 
at the cab around her. The line steel mesh of the ceiling, she thought, 
and the row of rivets in the corner, holding sheets of steel sealed 
together — who made them? The brute force of men's muscles? Who 
made it possible for four dials and three levers in front of Pat Logan 
to hold the incredible power of the sixteen motors behind them and 
deliver it to the effortless control of one man's hand? 

These things and the capacity from which they came— was this the 
pursuit men regarded as evil? Was this what they called an ignoble 
concern with the physical world? Was this the state of being enslaved 
by matter? Was this the surrender of man's spirit to his twdv? 

She shook her head, as if she wished she could toss tfce subject 
out of the window and let it get shattered somewhere tatong the 
track. She looked at the sun on the summer fields. She di^l not have 
to think, because these questions were only details of a| truth she 
knew and had always known, Let them go past like the* telegraph 
poles. The thing she knew was like the wires flying a hove in an 
unbroken line. The words for it, and for this journey, and for her 

226 



feeling, and for the whole of man’s earth, were: IPs so simple and 
so right I 

She looked out at the country. She had been aware for some time 
of the human figures that flashed with an odd regularity at the side 
of the track. But they went by so fast that she could not grasp their 
meaning until, like the squares of a movie film, brief flashes blended 
into a whole and she understood it. She had had the track guarded 
since its completion, but she had not hired the human chain she saw 
strung out along the right-of-way. A solitary figure stood at every 
mile post. Some were young schoolboys, others were so old that the 
silhouettes of their bodies looked bent against the sky. All of them 
were armed, with anything they had found, from costly rifles to an- 
cient muskets. All of them wore railroad caps. They were the sons 
of Taggart employees, and old railroad men who had retired after a 
full lifetime of Taggart service. They had come, unsummoned, to 
guard this train. As the engine went past him, every man in his turn 
stood erect, at attention, and raised his gun in a military salute. 

When she grasped it, she burst out laughing, suddenly, with the 
abruptness of a cry. She laughed, shaking, like a child: it sounded 
like sobs of deliverance. Pal Logan nodded to her with a faint smile; 
he had noted the guard of honor long ago. She leaned to the open 
window, and her arm swept in wide curves of triumph, waving to 
the men by the track. 

On the crest of a distant hill, she saw a crowd of people, their 
arms swinging against the sky. The gray houses of a village were 
scattered through a valley below, as it dropped there once and for- 
gotten; the roof lines slanted, sagging, and the years had washed 
away the coloi of the walls Perhaps generations had lived there, 
with nothing to mark the passage of their days but the movement 
of the sun from east to west. Now, these men had climbed the hill 
to see a silver- headed cornel cut through their plains like the sound 
of a bugle through a long weight of silence 

As houses began to come more frequently, closer to the track, she 
saw people at the windows, on the poichcs, on distant roofs. She 
saw crowds blocking the roads at grade crossings. The roads went 
sweeping past like the spokes of a fan, and she could not distinguish 
human figures, only their arms greeting the train like branches wav- 
ing in the wind of its speed. They stood under the swinging red lights 
of warning signals, under the signs saying: “Stop. Look. Listen.** 

The station past which they flew, as they went through a town at 
a hundred miles an hour, was a swaying sculpture ot people from 
platform to roof. She caught the flicker of waving arms, of hats tossed 
in the air, of something flung against the side of the engine, which 
was a bunch of flowers. 

As the miles clicked past them, the towns went by. with the sta- 
tions at which they did not stop, with the crowds of people who had 
come only to see, to cheer and to hope. She saw garlands of flowers 
under the sooted eaves of old station buildings, and bunting of red- 
white-and-hltH? on the time-eaten walls. U was like the pictures she 
had seen — and envied - -in schoolbook histories of railroads, from the 
era when people gathered to greet the first run of a train. It was 

227 



like the age when Nat Taggart moved across the country* and the 
stops along his way were marked by men eager for the sight of 
achievement. That age* she had thought, was gone; generations had 
passed* with no event to greet anywhere* with nothing to see but the 
cracks lengthening year by year on the walls built by Nat Taggart. 
Yet men came again* as they had come in his time* drawn by the 
same response. 

She glanced at Rearden. He stood against the wall* unaware of 
the crowds, indifferent to admiration. He was watching the perfor- 
mance of track and train with an expert’s intensity of professional 
interest, his bearing suggested that he would kick aside, as irrelevant, 
any thought such as “They like it,” when the thought ringing in his 
mind was it works!” 

His tall figure in the single gray of slacks and shirt looked as if 
his body were stripped for action. The slacks stressed the long lines 
of his legs, the light, firm posture of standing without effort or being 
ready to swing forward at an instant's notice: the short sleeves 
stressed the gaunt strength of his amis; the open shirt bared the light 
skin of his chest. 

She turned away, realizing suddenly that she had been glancing 
back at him too often. But this day had no ties to past or future — 
her thoughts were cut off from implications — she saw no further 
meaning, only the immediate intensity of the feeling that she was 
imprisoned with him, sealed together in the same cube of air. the 
closeness of his presence underscoring her awareness of this day, as 
his rails underscored the flight of the train. 

She turned deliberately and glanced back. He was looking at her. 
He did not turn away, but held her glance, coldly and with full 
intention. She smiled defiantly, not letting herself know the full 
meaning of her smile, knowing only that it was the sharpest blow 
she could strike at this inflexible face. She felt a sudden desire to 
see him trembling, to tear a cry out of him. She turned her head 
away, slowty, feeling a reckless amusement, wondering why she 
found it difficult to breathe. 

She sat leaning back in her chair, looking ahead, knowing that he 
was as aware of her as she was of him. She found pleasure in the 
special self-consciousness it gave her. When she crossed her legs, 
when she leaned on her arm against the window sill, when she 
brushed her hair off her forehead — every movement of her body was 
underscored by a feeling the unadmitted words for which were: Is 
he seeing it? 

The towns had been left behind. The track was rising through a 
country growing more grimly reluctant to permit approach!. The rails 
kept vanishing behind curves, and the ridges of hills kept moving 
closer, as if the plains were being folded into pleats The- flat stone 
shelves of Colorado were advancing to the edge of the |rack— and 
the distant reaches of the sky were shrinking into wave* of bluish 
mountains. 

Far ahead* they saw a mist of smoke over factory chim&eys— then 
the web of a power station ami the lone needle of a steej structure. 
They were approaching Denver. 

228 



She glanced at Pat Logan. He was leaning forward a little farther. 
She saw a slight tightening in the fingers of his hand and in his eyes. 
He knew, as she did, the danger of crossing the city at the speed 
they were traveling. 

It was a succession of minutes, but it hit them as a single whole. 
First, they saw the lone shapes, which were factories, rolling across 
their windowpanes— then the shapes fused into the blur of streets — 
then a delta of rails spread out before them, like the mouth of a 
funnel sucking them into the Taggart station, with nothing to protect 
them but the small green beads of light scattered over the ground — 
from the height of the cab, they saw boxcars on sidings streak past 
as flat ribbons of roof tops — the black hole of the train-shed flew at 
their faces— they hurtled through an explosion of sound, the beating 
of wheels against the glass panes of a vault, and the screams of 
cheering from a mass that swayed like a liquid in the darkness among 
steel columns they flew toward a glowing arch and the green lights 
hanging in the open sky beyond, the green lights that were like the 
doorknobs of space, throwing door after door open before them. 
Then, vanishing behind them, went the streets clotted with traffic, 
the open windows bulging with human figures, the screaming sirens, 
and— I rom the top of a distant skyscraper- -a cloud of paper snow- 
flakes shimmering on the air, flung by someone who saw the passage 
ol a silver bullet across a city stopped still to watch it. 

Then they were out again, on a r<K v ky grade- -anti with shocking 
suddenness, the mountains were before them, as if the city had flung 
them straight at a granite wall, and a thin ledge had caught them in 
time They were clinging to the side of the vertical cliff, with the 
earth rolling down, dropping away, and giant tiers of twisted boulders 
streaming up and shutting out the sun. leaving them to speed through 
a bluish twilight, with no sight of soil or sky. 

The curves of rail became coiling circles among walls that ad- 
vanced to grind them off their sides. But the track cut through at 
times and the mountains parted, flaring open like two wings at the 
tip of the rail — <mc wing green, made of vertical needles, with whole 
pines serving as the pile of a solid carpet— the other reddish-brown, 
made of naked rock. 

She looked down through the open window and saw the silver 
side of the engine hanging over empty spaa'. Far below, the thin 
thread of a stream went falling from ledge to ledge, and the ferns 
that drooped to the water were the shimmering tops of birch trees. 
She saw the engine's tail of boxcars winding along the face of a 
granite drop- -and miles of contorted stone below, she saw the coils 
of gieen-bluc rail unwinding behind the train. 

A wall of rock shot upward in their path, filling the windshield, 
darkening the cab. so close that it seemed as if the remnant of time 
could not let them escape it. But she heard the screech of wheels 
on curve, the light came bursting back -and she saw an open stretch 
of rail on a narrow shelf. The shelf ended m space. The nose of the 
engine was aimed straight at the sky. There was nothing to stop 
them but two strips of green-blue metal strung in a curve along 
the shelf. 


229 



To take the pounding violence of sixteen motors, she thought, the 
thrust of seven thousand tons of steel and freight, to withstand it, grip 
it and swing it around a curve, was the impossible feat performed by 
two strips of metal no wider than her arm. What made it possible? 
What power had given to an unseen arrangement of molecules the 
power on which their lives depended and the lives of all the men 
who waited for the eighty boxcars? She saw a man's face and hands 
in the glow of a laboratory oven, over the white liquid of a sample 
of metal. 

She felt the sweep of an emotion which she could not contain, as 
of something bursting upward. She turned to the door of the motor 
units, she threw it open to a screaming jet of sound and escaped 
into the pounding of the engine’s heart. 

For a moment, it was as if she were reduced to a single sense, the 
sense of hearing, and what remained of her hearing was only a long, 
rising, falling, rising scream. She stood in a swaying, sealed chamber 
of metal, looking at the giant generators. She had wanted to sec 
them, because the sense of triumph within her was bound to them, 
to her love for them, to the reason of the life-work she had chosen. 
In the abnormal clarity of a violent emotion, she left as it she were 
about to grasp something she had never known and had to know. 
She laughed aloud, but heard no sound of it; nothing could be heard 
through the continuous explosion. ‘The John (Jail Line!” she 
shouted, for the amusement of feeling her voice swept away from 
her lips. 

She moved slowly along the length of the motor units, down a 
narrow passage between the engines and the wall She felt the im- 
modesty of an intruder, as if she had slipped inside a living creature, 
under us silver skin, and were watching its lite beating in gray metal 
cylinders, in twisted coils, in sealed tubes, in the convulsive whirl ot 
blades in wire cages. The enormous complexity ol the shape above 
her was drained by invisible channels, and the violence raging within 
it was led to'fragile needles on glass dials, to green and red beads 
winking on panels, to tall, thin cabinets stenciled “High Voltage *' 

Why had she always lelt that joyous sense of confidence when 
looking at machines? — she thought. In these giant shapes, two as- 
pects pertaining to the inhuman were radiantly absent: the causeless 
and the purposeless Every part of the motors was an embodied 
answer to “Why?" and “What tor — like the steps of a life -course 
chosen by the sort of mind she worshipped. The motors were a moral 
code cast in steel. 

They are alive, she thought, because thev are the physical shape 
of the action of a living power— of the mind that had been able to 
grasp the whole of this complexity, to set its purpose, to give it form. 
For an instant, it seemed to her that the motors were transparent 
and she was seeing the net of their nervous system. It wa$ a net of 
connections, more intricate, more crucial than all of their jwires and 
circuits: the rational connections made by that human mind which 
had fashioned any one part of them for the first time. 

They are alive, she thought, but their soul operates them Jby remote 
control Their soul is in every man who has the capacity to equal 

230 



this achievement. Should the soul vanish from the earth, the motors 
would stop, because that is the power which keeps them going — not 
the oil under the floor under her feet, the oil that would then become 
primeval ooze again — not the steel cylinders that would become 
stains of rust on the walls of the caves of shivering savages — the 
power of a living mind — the power of thought and choice and 
purpose. 

She was making her way back toward the cab, feeling that she 
wanted to laugh, to kneel or to lift her arms, wishing she were able to 
release the thing she felt, knowing that it had no form of expression. 

She stopped. She saw Rcarden standing by the steps of the door 
to the cab He was looking at her as if he knew why she had escaped 
and what she felt. They stood still, their bodies becoming a glance 
that met across a narrow passage. The beating within her was one 
with the beating of the motors — and she felt as if both came from 
him; the pounding rhythm wiped out her will. They went back to 
the cab, silently, knowing that there had been a moment which was 
not to be mentioned between them. 

The cliffs ahead were a bright, liquid gold. Strips of shadow were 
lengthening in the valleys below. The sun was descending to the 
peaks in the west. They were going west and up, toward the sun. 

The sky had deepened to the gteenish-blue of the rails, when they 
saw smokestacks in a distant valley. It was one of Colorado's new 
towns, the towns that had grown like a radiation trom the Wyatt oil 
fields. She saw the angular lines of modern houses, flat roofs, great 
sheets of windows It was too far to distinguish people. In the mo- 
ment when she thought that they would not be watching the train 
at that distance, a locket shot out trom among the buildings, rose 
high above the town and broke as a fountain ot gold stars against 
the darkening sky. Men whom she could not see, were seeing the 
streak of the tram on the side of the mountain, and were sending a 
salute, a lonely plume ol tire in the dusk, the symbol of celebration 
or ot a call tor help. 

Beyond the next turn, in a sudden view of distance, she saw two 
dots of electric light, white and red, low in the sky. They were not 
an planes -she saw the cones of metal girders supporting them — and 
in the moment when she knew that they were the derricks of Wyatt 
Oil, she saw that the track was sweeping downward, that the earth 
Hared open, as if the mountains were Hung apart— and at the bottom, 
at the foot of the Wyatt hill, across the dark crack of a canyon, she 
saw (he bridge of Rcarden Metal. 

They were Hying down, she toigot the careful grading, the great 
curves of the gradual descent, she felt as if the train were plunging 
downward, head first, she watched the bridge growing to meet 
them -a small, square tunnel of metal lace work, a few beams criss- 
crossed through the air, green-blue and glowing, struck by a long 
ray of sunset light trom some crack in the barrier of mountains, 
'There were people by the bridge, the dark splash of a crowd, but 
they, rolled off the edge of her consciousness. She heard the rising, 
accelerating sound of the wheels — and some theme of music, heard 
to the rhythm of wheels, kept tugging at her mind, growing louder — 

231 



it hum suddenly within the calx hut she knew that it was only in 
her mind: the Fifth Concerto by Richard Halley — she thought: did 
he write it for this? had he known a feeling such as this?- -they were 
going faster, they had left the ground, she thought, flung oft by the 
mountains as by a springboard, they were now sailing through 
space — it's not a fair test, she thought, we’re not going to touch that 
bridge — she saw Rearden’s face above her, she held his eyes and 
her head leaned back, so that her face lay still on the air under his 
face— they heard a ringing blast of metal, they heard a drum roll 
under their feet, the diagonals of the bridge went smearing aeioss 
the windows with the sound of a metal rod being run along the 
pickets of a fence — then the windows were too suddenly clear, 
the sweep ol their downward plunge was carrying them up a hill, the 
derricks of Wyatt Oil were reeling belore them — Pat Logan turned, 
glancing up at Kcardcn with the hint of a smile --and Reardon said, 
'That’s that.” 

The sign on the edge of a roof read, wy m i jinc non She stared, 
feeling that there was something odd about it, until she grasped what 
it was: the sign did not move. The shaipcst jolt ot the journey' was 
the realization that the engine stood still 

She heard voices somewhere, she looked down and saw that there 
were people on the platform. Then the doot ot the cab was flung 
open, she knew that she had to be first to descend, and she stepped 
to the edge. For the flash ol an instant, she felt the slenderness ot 
her own body, the lightness of standing full-figure in a current of 
open air, She gripped the metal bars and started down the ladder. 
She was halfway down when she felt the palms of a man’s hands 
slam tight against her ribs and waistline, she was torn oft the steps, 
swung through the air and deposited on the ground She could not 
believe that the voting boy laughing in her lace was Hllis Wyatt. The 
tense, scornful face she remembered, now had the purity, the eager- 
ness, the joyous benevolence of a child in the kind of world for 
which he had been intended. 

She was leaning against his shoulder, feeling unsteady on the mo- 
tionless ground, with his arm about her. she was laughing, she was 
listening to the things he said, she was answering, “Hut didn't you 
know we would 0 ' 

In a moment, '-he saw the faces around them Fhcy were the bond- 
holders of the John Galt Line, the men who were Nielsen Motors, 
Hammond Cars, Stockton Foundry and all the others. She shook 
their hands, and there were no speeches; she stoiwj against Hllis 
Wyatt, sagging a little, brushing her hair away from her eves, leaving 
smudges of soot on her forehead. She shook the hands <«! the men 
of the train’s crew, without words, with the seal of the grifs on their 
faces. There were flash hulbs exploding around them, and* men wav- 
ing to them from the riggings of the oil wells on the slopes of the 
mountains. Above her head, above the heads of the erovfd, the let- 
ters TT on a silver shield were hit by the last ray of a sinking sun. 

Ellis Wyatt had taken charge. He was leading her somewhere, the 
sweep of his arm cutting a path for them through the crpwd, when 
one of the men with the cameras broke through to her side. “Mis-s 

232 



Taggart,” he called, ‘‘will you give us a message for the public?” 
Ellis Wyatt pointed at the long string of freight ears “She has/’ 

Then she was sitting in the back seat of an open ear, driving up 
the curves of a mountain road. The man beside her was Reardon, 
the driver was Ellis Wyatt. 

They stopped at a house that stood on the edge ot a dill, with no 
other habitation anywhere in sight, with the whole of the oil fields 
spread on the slopes below, 

“Why, ol course you’re staving at mv house overnight, both of 
you,” said Ellis Wyatt, as they went in. “Where did you expect to 
slay?” 

She laughed. “I don’t know. I hadn’t thought ot it at all.” 

“The nearest town is an hour’s drive away That's where your 
trew has gone: your boys at the division point are giving a party in 
their honor. So is the whole town. But I told led Nielsen and the 
others that we’d have no banquets for you and no oratory. Unless 
you'd like if’” 

“God, no!” she said. “Thanks, Ellis.*' 

It was dark when they sat at the dinner table in a room that had 
large windows and a tew pieces ol costly furniture. The dinner was 
solved bv a silent figure m a white jacket, the only other inhabitant 
of the house, an elderly Indian with a stony face and a courteous 
manner. A tew points of tire were seafteied through the room, run- 
ning-over and out beyond the windows, the candies on the table, the 
lights on the derricks, and the stars: 

“Do you think that you have vour hands tul! now?” Ellis Wyatt 
was saying “Just give me a year and HI give you something to keep 
you busy. I wo tank trams a day. Dagnv' 1 It s going to be four or six 
01 as many as you wish me to till.” Elis, hand swept over the lights 
on the mountains. “This? Ifs nothing, compared to what Eve got 
coming.” He pointed west “ The Buena Esperan/.d Pass. Five miles 
from here. Evei vbody’s wondering what Em doing with it. Oil shale. 
How many years ago was it that they gave up trying to get oil from 
shale, because it was too expensive” Well, wait till you see the pro- 
cess Eve developed. It will be the cheapest oil ever to splash in their 
faces, and an unlimited supply ol it. an untapped supply that will 
make the biggest oil pool look hke a mud puddle. Did 1 order a 
pipe line? Hank, you and I will have to build pipe lines in all direc- 
tions to . . . Oh. I beg your pardon. I don't believe l introduced 
myself when f spoke to you at the station. 1 haven't even told you 
iny name.” 

Rcardcn grinned. “Eve guessed it by now.” 

“Em sorry, 1 don’t like to be careless, but I was too excited.” 

“What were you excited about?” asked Dagny, her eyes narrowed 
in mockery. 

Wyatt held her glance for a moment; his answer had a tone of 
solemn intensity strangely conveyed by a smiling voice, “About the 
most beautiful slap in the face 1 ever got and deserved,” 

“Do you mean, for our first meeting?” 

“I mean, for our first meeting? 1 

“Don't. You were right.’ 1 


233 



“I was. About everything but you. Dagny, to find an exception 
after years of . . . Oh, to hell with them! Do you want me to turn 
on the radio and hear what they’re saying about the two of you 
tonight?’' 

“No." 

•‘Good. I don’t want to hear them. Let them swallow their own 
speeches. They’re all climbing on the band wagon now. We’re the 
band." He glanced at Rearden. “What are you smiling at?" 

“I’ve always been curious to see what you’re like." 

‘“I’ve never had a chance to be what I’m like — except tonight." 

‘“Do you live here alone, like this, miles away from everything?" 

Wyatt pointed at the window. ‘Tin a couple of steps away 
from — every thi ng. ’ * 

“What about people?" 

“I have guest rooms for the kind of people who come to see me 
on business. 1 want as many miles as possible between myself and 
all the other kinds." lie leaned forward to refill their wine glasses. 
“Hank, why don’t you move to Colorado? To hell with New York 
and the Eastern Seaboard! This is the capital of the Renaissance. 
The Second Renaissance — not of oil paintings and cathedrals — but 
of oil derricks, power plants, and motors made of Rearden Metal. 
They had the Stone Age and the Iron Age and now they’re going 
to call it the Rearden Metal Age — because there’s no limit to what 
your Metal has made possible." 

“I’m going to buy a few square miles of Pennsylvania.” said Rear- 
den. “The ones around my mills. It would have been cheaper to 
build a branch here, as I wanted, but you know why I can’t, and to 
hell with them! I’ll beat them anyway. I’m going to expand the 
mills — and if she can give me tlirec-day freight service to Colorado. 
I’ll give you a race for who’s going to be the capital of the Ren- 
aissance!" 

“Give me n year,” said Dagny, “of running trains on the John 
Galt Line, give me time to pull the Taggart system togethei — and 
I’ll give you three-day freight service across the continent, on a Rear- 
den Metal track from ocean to ocean!” 

“Who was it that said he needed a fulcrum?" said Ellis Wyatt. 
“Give me an unobstructed right-of-wav and I’ll show them how to 
move the earth!" 

She wondered what it was that she liked about the sound of Wy- 
att’s laughter. Their voices, even her own, had a tone she had never 
heard before. When they rose from the table, she was astonished to 
notice that the candies were the only illumination of the room: she 
had fell as if she were sitting in a violent light. 

Ellis WyatL picked up his glass, looked at their faces andtsnid, “To 
the world as it seems to be right now!" 

He emptied the glass with a single movement. 

She heard the crash of the glass against the wall in the sa^ne instant 
that she saw a circling current — from the curve of his btjjdy to the 
sweep of his arm to the terrible violence of his hand that flung the 
glass across the room. It was not the conventional gesture meant as 

234 



celebration, it was the gesture of a rebellious anger, the vicious ges- 
ture which is movement substituted for a scream of pain, 

“Ellis ” she whispered, “what’s the matter?” 

He turned to look at her. With the same violent suddenness* his 
eyes were clear, his face was calm; what frightened her was seeing 
him smile gently. “I’m sorry,’* he said, “Never mind. We’ll try to 
think that it will last.” 

The earth below was streaked with moonlight, when Wyatt led 
them up an outside stairway to the second floor of the house, to the 
open gallery at the doors of the guest rooms. He wished them good 
night and they heard his steps descending the stairs. The moonlight 
seemed to drain sound as it drained color. The steps rolled into a 
distant past, and when they died, the silence had the quality of a 
solitude that had lasted for a long time, as if no person were left 
anywhere in reach. 

She did not turn to the door of her room. He did not move. At 
the level of their feet, there was nothing but a thin railing and a 
spread of space. Angular tiers descended below, with shadows re- 
peating the steel Uaccry ot derricks, criss-crossing sharp, black lines 
on patches of glowing rock. A tew lights, white and red, trembled 
in the clear air. like drops of rain caught on the edges of steel girders. 
Far in the, distance, three small drops were green, strung in a line 
along the Taggart track. Beyond them, af the end of space, at the 
foot of a white curve, hung a webbed rectangle which was the bridge. 

She felt a rhythm without sound or movement, a sense of beating 
tension, as if the wheels of the John Galt Line were still speeding 
on Slowly, in answer and m resistance to an unspoken summons, 
she turned and looked at him. 

The look she saw on his face made her know lor the first time 
that she had known this would be the end of the journey. That look 
was not as men are taught to represent it. it was not a matter of 
loose muscles, hanging lips and mindless hunger, l’he lines of his 
face were pulled tight, giving it a peculiar purity, a sharp precision 
of form, making it clean and young. His mouth was taut, the lips 
faintly drawn inward, stressing the outline ot its shape. Only his eyes 
were blurred, their lower lids swollen and raised, iheir glance intent 
with that which resembled hatred and pain. 

The shock became numbness spreading through her body— she felt 
a tight pressure in her throat and her stomach— she was conscious 
of nothing but a silent convulsion that made her unable to breathe. 
But what she felt, without words for it, was: Yes, Hank, yes— now — 
because it is part of the same battle, m some way that I can't 
name . . . because it is our being, against theirs . . . our great capacity, 
for which they torture us, the capacity of happiness . . . Now, like 
this, without words or questions . . because we want it . . . 

It was like an act of hatred, like the cutting blow of a lash encir- 
cling her body: she felt his arms around her, she felt her legs pulled 
forward against him and her chest bent back under the pressure of 
his, .his mouth on hers. 

Her hand moved from his shoulders to his waist to his legs, releas- 
ing the unconfessed desire of her every meeting with him. When she 

235 



tore her mouth away from him, she was laughing soundlessly, in 
triumph, as if saying: Hank Rearden — the austere, unapproachable 
Hank Rearden of the monklike office, the business confeiences, the 
harsh bargains — do you remember them now? — I’m thinking of it, 
for the pleasure of knowing that I’ve brought you to this. He was 
not smiling, his face was tight, it was the face of an enemy, he jerked 
her head and caught her mouth again, as if he were inflicting a 
wound. 

She felt him trembling and she thought that this was the kind of 
cry she had wanted to tear from him — this surrender through the 
shreds of his tortured resistance. Yet she knew, at the same time, 
that the triumph was his, that her laughter was her tribute to him, 
that her defiance was submission, that the purpose of all of her vio- 
lent strength was only to make his victory the greater — he was hold- 
ing her body against his, as if stressing his wish to let her know that 
she was now only a tool for the satisfaction— of his desire — and his 
victory, she knew, was her wish to let him reduce her to that. What- 
ever I am, she thought, whatever pride of person I may hold, the 
pride of my courage, of my work, of my mind and my freedom — 
that is what I offer you for the pleasure of your body, that is what 
I want you to use in your service — and that you want it to serve you 
is the greatest reward I can have. 

There were lights burning in the two rooms behind them. He took 
her wrist and threw her inside his room, making the gesture tell her 
that he needed no sign of consent or resistance. He locked the door, 
watching her face. Standing straight, holding his glance, she extended 
her arm to the lamp on the table and turned out the light, lie ap- 
proached- He turned the light on again, with a single, contemptuous 
jerk of his wrist. She saw him smile for the first time, a slow, mock- 
ing, sensual smile that stressed the purpose of his action. 

He was holding her half-stretched across the bed, he was tearing 
her clothes off, while her face was pressed against him, her mouth 
moving down the line of his neck, down his shoulder. She knew that 
every gesture oLher desire for him struck him like a blow, that there 
was some shudder of incredulous anger within him — yet that no gesture 
would satisfy his greed for every evidence of her desire. 

He stood looking down at her naked body, he leaned over, she 
heard his voice — it was more a statement of contemptuous triumph 
than a question: “You want it‘>” Her answer was more a gasp than 
a word, her eyes closed, her mouth open: “Yes.” 

She knew that what she felt with the skin of her arms was the 
cloth of his shirt, she knew that the lips she felt on her mouth were 
his, but in the rest of her there was no distinction between his being 
and her own, as there was no division between body and spirit. 
Through all the steps of the years behind them, the steps down a 
course chosen in the courage of a single loyalty: their love of exis- 
tence-chosen in the knowledge that nothing will be given, that one 
must make one’s own desire and every shape of its fulfilltnent — 
through the steps of shaping metal, rails and motors— they had 
moved by the power ol the thought that one remakes the earth for 
one’s enjoyment, that man’s spirit gives meaning to insentient matter 

236 



by molding it to serve one’s chosen goal. The course led them to 
the moment when, in answer to the highest of one’s values, in an 
admiration not to be expressed by any other form of tribute, one’s 
spirit makes one’s body become the tribute, recasting it — as proof* 
as sanction, as reward — into a single sensation of such intensity of 
joy that no other sanction of one’s existence is necessary. He heard 
the moan ot her breath, she felt the shudder of his body, in the 
same instant. 


Chapter IX THE SACRED AND THE PROFANE 

She looked at the glowing bands on the skin of her arm, spaced like 
bracelets from her wrist to her shoulder. They were strips of sunlight 
from the Venetian blinds on the window of an unfamiliar room. She saw 
a bruise above her elbow, with dark beads that had been blood. Her 
arm lay on the blanket that covered her body. She was aware of her 
legs and hips, but the rest of her body was only a sense of lightness, 
as if it were stretched restfuJly across the air in a place that looked 
like a cage made of sunrays. 

fuming to look at him, she thought: From his aloofness, from his 
manner of glass-enclosed formality, from his pride in never being 
made to feel anything — to this, to Hank Rearden in bed beside her, 
after hours of a violence which they could not name now, not in 
words or in daylight — but which was in their eyes, as they looked at 
each other, which they wanted to name, to stress, to throw at each 
other's face. 

He saw the face of a young girl, her lips suggesting a smile, as if 
her natural slate of relaxation were a state of radiance, a lqck of 
hair tailing across her cheek to the curve of a naked shoulder, her 
eyes looking at him as if she were ready to accept anything he might 
wish to say, as she had been ready to accept anything he had wished 
to do. 

He reached over and moved the lock of hair from her cheek, 
cautiously, as if it were fragile. He held it back with his fingertips 
and looked at her face. Then his fingers closed suddenly in her hair 
and he raised the lock to his lips. The way he pressed his mouth to 
it was tenderness, but the way his fingers held it was despair. 

He dropped back on the pillow and lay still, his eyes closed. Fits 
face seemed young, at peace. Seeing it for a moment without the 
reins of tension, she realized suddenly the extent of the unhappiness 
he had borne; but it's past now, she thought, it’s over. 

He got up, not looking at her. His face was blank and closed again. 
He picked up his clothes from the floor and proceeded to dress* 
standing in the middle of the room, half-turned away from her. He 
acted, not as if she wasn’t present, but as if it did not matter that 
she was. His movements, as he buttoned his shirt, as he buckled the 
belt of his slacks, had the rapid precision of performing a duty. 

She lay back on the pillow, watching him, enjoying the sight of 
his figure in motion. She liked the gray slacks and shirt — the expert 
mechanic of the John Galt Line, she thought, in the stripes of sun- 

237 



light and shadow, like a convict behind bars. But they were not bars 
any longer, they were the cracks of a wall which the John Galt Line 
had broken, the advance notice of what awaited them outside, be- 
yond the Venetian blinds — she thought of the trip back, on the new 
rail, with the first train from Wyatt Junction — the trip back to her 
offio> in the Taggart Building and to all the things now open for her 
to win — but she was free to let it wait, she did not want to think of 
it, she was thinking of the first touch of his mouth on hers — she was 
free to feel it, to hold a moment when nothing else was of any 
concern — she smiled defiantly at the strips of sky beyond the blinds. 

*‘I want you to know this.*’ 

He stood by the bed, dressed, looking down at her. His voice had 
pronounced it evenly, with great clarity and no inflection. She looked 
up at him obediently. He said: 

“What I feel for you is contempt. But it’s nothing, compared to 
the contempt l teel for myself. I don’t love you. I’ve never loved 
anyone, f wanted you from the first moment I saw you. I wanted 
you as one wants a whore — for the same reason and purpose. 1 spent 
two years damning myself, because I thought you were above a de- 
sire of this kind. You're not. You’re as vile an animal as 1 am. I 
should loathe my discovering it, I don’t. Yesteiday, I would have 
killed anyone who’d tell me that you were capable of doing what I've 
had you do. Today, 1 would give my life not to let it be otherwise, not 
to have you be anything but the bitch you are. All the greatness that 
1 saw in you — l would not take it in exchange for the obscenity of 
your talent at an animal’s sensation of pleasure. Wc were two great 
beings, you and 1, proud of our strength, weren't we? Well, this is 
all that’s left of us— and 1 want no self-deception about it.” 

He spoke slowly, as if lashing himself with his words. There was 
no sound of emotion in his voice, only the lifeless pull of effort; it 
was not the tone of a man's willingness to speak, but the ugly, tor- 
tured sound of duty. 

“I held it as my honor that 1 would never need anyone 1 need 
you. It had been my pride that I had always acted on my convictions. 
I’ve given in to a desire which I despise. It is a desire that hits 
reduced my mind, my will, my being, my power to exist into an 
abject dependence upon you— not even upon the Dagny Taggart 
whom I admired — but upon your body, your hands, your mouth and 
the few seconds of a convulsion of your muscles. I had never broken 
my word. Now I’ve broken an oath I gave for life. I had never 
committed an act that had to be hidden. Now I am to lie, to sneak, 
to hide. Whatever 1 wanted, I was free to proclaim it aloud and 
achieve it in I he sight of the whole world. Now my only desire is 
one 1 loathe to name even to myself. But it is my only desire. I’m 
going to have you — I’d give up everything I own for it. the mills, 
the Metal, the achievement ol my whole life. I’m going to have you 
at the price of more than myself: at the price of my sclf-hsteem — 
and l want you to know u. I want no pretense, no evasion /no silent 
indulgence, with the nature of our actions left unnamed. l»want no 
pretense about love, value, loyalty or respect. I want no!shred of 
honor left to us, to hide behind. I’ve never begged for m<rcy. I've 

238 



chosen to do this-and Til take all the consequences* including the 
full recognition of my choice. It's depravity— and 1 accept it as 
such — and there is no height of virtue that 1 wouldn’t give up for it. 
Now if you wish to slap my face* go ahead. I wish you woukl*” 

She had listened, sitting up straight, holding the blanket clutched 
at her throat to cover her body. At first, he had seen her eyes grow- 
ing dark with incredulous shock. Then it seemed to him that she was 
listening with greater attentiveness, but seeing more than his face, 
even though her eyes were fixed on his. She looked as if she were 
studying intently some revelation that had never confronted her be- 
fore. He felt as if some ray of light were growing stronger on his 
face, because he saw its reflection on hers, as she watched him— he 
saw the shock vanishing, then the wonder — he saw her face being 
smoothed into a strange serenity that seemed quiet and glittering 
at once. 

When he stopped, she burst out laughing. 

The shock to him was that he heard no anger in her laughter. She 
laughed simply, easily, in joyous amusement, in release, not as one 
laughs at the solution of a problem, but at the discovery that no 
problem had ever existed. 

She threw the blanket off with a stressed, deliberate sweep of her 
arm. She stood up. She saw her clothes on the floor and kicked them 
aside. She stood facing him, naked. She said: 

“1 want you. Hank. I’m much more of an animal than you think, 
l wanted you from the first moment 1 saw you— and the only thing 
I'm ashamed of is that I did not know it. 1 did not know why, for 
two years, the brightest moments 1 found were the ones in your 
office, where I could lilt my head to look up at you. I did not know 
the nature of what I felt in your presence, nor the reason. 1 know 
it now. That is all l want. Hank. 1 want you in my bed — and you 
are free of me for all the rest of your time. There’s nothing you’ll 
have to pretend — don’t think of me, don’t feel; don't care — I do not 
want your mind, your will, your being or your soul, so long as it’s 
to me that you will come for that lowest one of your desires. 1 am 
an animal who wants nothing but the sensation of pleasure which 
you despise— but 1 want it from you. You’d give up any height of 
virtue for it, while l — I haven’t any to give up. There’s none I seek 
or wish to reach. I am so low that l would exchange the greatest 
sight of beauty in the world for the sight of your figure in the cab 
of a railroad engine. And seeing it, I would not Ire able to see it 
indifferently. You don’t have to fear that you're now dependent 
upon me. It’s I who will depend on any whim of yours. You’ll have 
me any time you wish, anywhere, on any terms. Did you call it the 
obscenity of my talent? lt\s such that it gives you a safer hold on 
me than on any other property you own. You may dispose of me as 
you please — I’m not afraid to admit it — 1 have nothing to protect 
from you and nothing to reserve. You think that thi*s is a threat to 
your achievement* but it is not to mine. I will sit at my desk, and 
work, and when the things around me get hard to bear, I will think 
that for my reward I will be in your bed that night. Did you call it 
depravity? I am much more depraved than you are: you hold it as 

239 



your guilt, and I — as my pride. I'm more proud of it than of anything 
IVe done, more proud than of building the Line. If Tm asked to 
name my proudest attainment, I will say: I have vslept with Hank 
Rearden. 1 had earned it.” 

When he threw her down on the bed, their bodies met like the 
two sounds that broke against each other in the air of the room: the 
sound of his tortured moan and of her laughter. 

* * 

The rain was invisible in the darkness’ of the streets, but it hung 
like the sparkling fringe of a lampshade under the corner light. Fum- 
bling in his pockets, James Taggart discovered that he had lost his 
handkerchief. He swore half-aloud, with resentful malice, as if the 
loss, the rain and his head cold were someone's personal conspiracy 
against him. 

There was a thin gruel of mud on the pavements; he felt a gluey 
suction under his shoe soles and a chill slipping down past his collar. 
He did not want to walk or to stop. He had no place to go. 

Leaving his office, after the meeting of the Board of Directors, he 
had realized suddenly that there were no other appointments, that 
he had a long evening ahead and no one to help him kill it. The 
front pages of the newspapers were screaming of the triumph of the 
John Galt Line, as the radios had screamed it yesterday and all 
through the night. The name of Taggart Transcontinental was 
stretched in headlines across the continent, like its track, and he had 
smiled in answer to the congratulations. He had smiled, seated at 
the head of the long table, at the Board meeting, while the Directors 
spoke about the soaring rise of the Taggart stock on the Exchange, 
while they cautiously asked to see his written agreement with his 
sister just in case, they said — and commented that it was fine, it was 
holeproof, there. was no doubt but that she would have to turn the 
Line over to Taggart Transcontinental at once, they spoke about 
their brilliant future and the debt of gratitude which the company 
owed to James Taggart. 

He had sat through the meeting, wishing it were over with, so that 
he could go home, then he had stepped out into the street and 
realized that home was the one place where he dared not go tonight. 
He could not be alone, not in the next few hours, yet there was 
nobody to call. He did not want to see people. He kept seeing the 
eye,s of the men of the Board when they spoke about his greatness: 
a sly, filmy look that held contempt for him and, more terrifyingly, 
for themselves. 

He walked, head down, a needle of rain pricking the skin of his 
neck once in a while. He looked away whenever he passed a news- 
stand. The papers seemed to shriek at him the name of tbe John 
Galt Line, and another name which he did not want to hear: v Ragnar 
Danneskjold. A ship bound for the People's State of Norway! with an 
Emergency Gift cargo of machine tools had been seized by| Ragnar 
Danneskjold last night. That story disturbed him in some personal 
manner which he could not explain. The feeling seemed -to have 
some quality in common with the things he felt about the John 
Galt Line. 


240 



It’s because he had a cold, he thought; he wouldn’t fee! this way 
if he didn’t have a cold; a man couldn’t be expected to be in top 
form when he had a cold — he couldn’t help it — what did they expect 
him to do tonight, sing and dance?— he snapped the question angrily 
at the unknown judges of his unwitnessed mood- He fumbled for his 
handkerchief again, cursed and decided that he’d better stop some- 
where to buy some paper tissues. 

Across the square of what had once been a busy netghborhr>od, 
he saw the lighted windows ot a dune store, still open hopefully at 
this late hour. There's another one that will go out of business pretty 
soon, he thought as he crossed the square; the thought gave him 
pleasure. 

There were glaring lights inside, a few tired salesgirls among a 
spread ot deserted counters, and the screaming ot a phonograph 
record being played for a tone, listless customer in a corner. The 
music swallowed the sharp edges of Taggart's voice: he asked for 
paper tissues in a tone which implied that the salesgirl was responsi- 
ble tor his cold The girl turned to the counter behind her, but turned 
back once to glance swiftly at his face She took a packet, but 
stopped, hesitating, studying him with peculiar curiosity. 

“Are you James Taggart?” she asked. 

“Yes 1 ” he snapped. ’Why 7 ” 

“Oh!” 

She gasped like a child at a burst of firecrackers, she was looking 
at him with a glance which he had thought to be reserved only for 
movie stars. 

T saw vour picture in the paper this morning, Mr. Taggart,” she 
sail! very rapidly, a faint flush appearing on her face and vanishing. 
“It said what a great achievement it was and how it was really you 
who had done it ail, only you didn't want it to be known.” 

“Oh.” said Taggart. He was smiling. 

“You look just like your picture,” she said in immense astonish- 
ment, and added, “Imagine you walking in here like this, in person!” 

“Shouldn’t J?” His tone was amused. 

“1 mean, everybody’s talking about it. the whole country, and 
you’re the man who did it— arid here you are* I’ve never seen an 
important person before. I've never been so close to anything impor- 
tant, 1 mean to any newspaper news.” 

He had never had the experience of seeing his presence give color 
to a place he entered: the girl looked as it she was not tired any 
longer, as if the dime store had become a scene of drama and 
wondeT . 

“Mr. laggart. is it true, what they said about you in the paper 7 ” 

“What did they say?” 

“About your secret.” 

“What secret?” 

“Weil, they said that when everybody was fighting about your 
bridge, whether it would stand or not. you didn't argue with them, 
you ’just went ahead, because you knew it would stand, when nobody 
else was sure of it — so the Line was a Taggart project and you were 

241 



the guiding spirit behind the scenes, but you kept it secret, because 
you didn’t care whether you got credit for it or not.” 

He had seen the mimeographed release of his Public Relations 
Department. “Yes,” he said, “it’s true.” The way she looked at him 
made him feel as if it were. 

“It was wonderful of you, Mr. Taggart.” 

“Do you always remember what you read in the newspapers, so 
well, in such detail?” 

“Why, yes, I guess so — all the interesting things. The big things. I 
like to read about them. Nothing big ever happens to me.” 

She said it gaily, without self-pity. There was a young, determined 
brusqueness in her voice and movements. She had a head of reddish- 
brown curls, wide-set eyes, a few freckles on the bridge of an up- 
turned nose. He thought that one would call her face attractive if 
one ever noticed it, but there was no particular reason to notice it. 
It was a common little face, except for a look of alertness, of eager 
interest, a look that expected the world to contain an exciting secret 
behind every corner. 

“Mr. Taggart, how does it feel to be a great man?” 

“How does it feel to be a little girl?” 

She laughed. “Why, wonderful.” 

“Then youYe better off than I am.” 

“Oh, how can you say such a — ” 

“Maybe you’re lucky if you don’t have anything to do with the 
big events in the newspapers. Big. What do you call big, anyway?” 

“Why . . . important.” 

“What's important?” 

“You’re the one who ought to tell me that, Mr. Taggart “ 

“Nothing’s important.” 

She looked at him incredulously. “You, of all people, saying that 
tonight of all nights!” 

“I don't feel wonderful at all. if that’s what you want to know. 
I’yc never felt less wonderful in my life.” 

He was astonished to see her studying his face with a look of 
concern such as no one had ever granted him “You're worn out. 
Mr, Taggart,” she said earnestly. “Tell them to go to hell.*' 

“Whom?” 

“Whoever's getting you down. It isn't right.” 

“What isn't?” 

“That you should feel this way. You’ve had a tough time, but 
you've licked them all, so you ought to enjoy yourself now. You’ve 
earned it.” 

“And how do you propose that I enjoy myself?” 

“Oh, I don’t know. But l thought you’d be having a celebration 
tonight, a party with all the big shots, and champagne, afrd things 
given to you, like keys to cities, a real swank party like that*— instead 
of walking around all by yourself, shopping for paper handkerchiefs, 
of all fool things!” 

“You give me those handkerchiefs, before you forget tfcem alto* 
gether” he said, handing her a dime. “And as to the swfink party, 
did it occur to you that 1 might not want to sec anybody tonight?” 

242 



She considered it earnestly. “No,*’ she said, “I hadn’t thought of 
it. But I can see why you wouldn’t.” 

“Why?” It was a question to which he had no answer. 

“Nobody’s really good enough for you, Mr. Taggart,” she an- 
swered very simply, not as flattery, but as a matter of fact. 

“Is that what you think?” 

“I don’t think I like people very much, Mr. Taggart. Not most 
of them.” 

“1 don't either. Not any of them.” 

“I thought a man like you — you wouldn’t know how mean they 
can be and how they try to step on you and ride on your back, if 
you let them. I thought the big men in the world could get away 
irom them and not have to be flea-bait all of the time, but maybe 1 
was wrong ” 

“What do you mean, flea-bait?” 

“Oh, it’s just something I tell myself when things get tough — that 
I've got to beat my way out to where I won't feel like I'm flea- 
bitten all the time by all kinds of lousiness — but maybe it’s the same 
anywhere, only the fleas get bigger." 

“Much bigger.” 

She remained silent, as if considering something, it's tunny,” she 
said sadly to some thought oi her own. 

“What’s tunny?” 

“I read a book once where it said that great men are always 
unhappy, and the gi eater— the unhappier. It didn't make sense to 
me. But maybe it's true." 

“It’s much truer than you think " 

She looked away, her face disturbed. 

“Why do you wortv so much about the gieat men?" he asked. 
“What are you, a hero worshipper ot some kind?” 

She turned to look at him and he saw the light of an inner smile, 
while her lace remained solemnly grave, it was the most eloquently 
personal glance he had ever seen directed at himself, while she an- 
swered in a quiet, impersonal voice. “Mr. Taggart. w f hat else is there 
to look up to'*” 

A screeching sound, neither quite bell nor buzzer, rang out sud- 
denly and went on ringing with nerve-grating insistence. 

.She jerked her head, as if awakening at the scream of an alarm 
dock, then sighed. “That’s closing time, Mr. Taggart,” she said 
regretfully. 

“Go get your hat — I’ll wait for you outside,” he said. 

She stared at him, as if among all of life's possibilities this was 
one she had never held as conceivable. 

“No kidding?" she whispered. 

“No kidding." 

She whirled around and ran like a streak to the door of the em- 
ployees' quartets, forgetting her counter, her duties and all feminine 
.concern about never showing eagerness in accepting a man’s in- 
vitation. 

hie stood looking after her for a moment, his eyes narrowed. He 
did not name to himself the nature of his own feeling — never to 

243 



“Mr. Taggart, what is it that makes you so unhappy?” 

“Why should you care whether I am or not?” 

“Because . . . well, if you haven’t the right to be happy and proud, 
who has?” 

“That’s what 1 want to know — who has?” He turned to her 
abruptly, the words exploding as if a safety fuse had blown, “He 
didn't invent iron ore and blast furnaces, did he?” 

“Who?” 

“Rearden. He didn't invent smelting and chemistry and air com- 
pression. He couldn’t have invented his Metal but for thousands and 
thousands of other people. His Metal! Why does he think it’s his? Why 
does he think it’s his invention ? Everybody uses the work of everybody 
else. Nobody ever invents anything.” 

She said, puzzled, “But the iron ore and all those other things were 
there all the time. Why didn't anybody else make that Metal, but Mr, 
Rearden did?” 

“He didn't do it for any noble purpose, he did it just tor his own 
profit. He’s never done anything for any other reason.” 

“What’s wrong with that, Mr. Taggart?” Then she laughed softly, 
as if at the sudden solution of a riddle “That’s nonsense, Mr. Tag- 
gart. You don’t mean it. You know that Mr. Rearden has earned all 
his profits, and so have you. You're saying those things just to be 
modest; when everybody knows what a great job you people have 
done — you and Mr. Rearden and your sister, who must be such a 
wonde rf u 1 pe rson ’ ’ ’ 

“Yeah? That’s what you think. She's a hard, insensitive woman 
who spends her life building tracks and bridges, not lor any great 
ideal, but only because that’s what she enjoys doing. It she enjoys 
it. what is there to admire about her doing it? I'm not so sure it was 
great — building that L.ine for all those prosperous industrialists in 
Colorado, when there are so many poor people in blighted areas 
who need transportation." 

“But, Mr. Taggart, it was you who fought to build that Line,” 

“Yes, because it was my duty — to the company and the slockhold- 
ers and our employees. But don't expect me to enjoy it. I’m not so 
sure it was great — inventing this complex new Metal, when so many 
nations are in need of plain iron- -why, do you know that the Peo- 
ple's State of China hasn’t even got enough nails to put wooden 
roofs over people’s heads?” 

“But . . . but 1 don’t see that that's your fault.” 

“Somebody should attend to it. Somebody with the vision to see 
beyond his own pocketbook. No sensitive person these days — when 
there's so much suffering around us — would devote ten years of his 
life to splashing about with a lot ot trick metals. You think it's great? 
Well, it's not any kind of superior ability, but just a hidfe that you 
couldn't pierce if you poured a ton of his own steel ovef his head! 
There are many people of much greater ability in the world, but you 
don’t read about them in the headlines and you don’t rim to gape 
at them at grade crossings — because they can't invent nonkollapsible 
bndges at a time when the suffering of mankind weighs on their 
spirit!” 


246 



She was loojdng at him silently, respectfully, her joyous eagerness 
toned down, her eyes subdued. He felt better. 

He picked up his drink, took a gulp, and chuckled abruptly at a 
sudden recollection. 

“It was funny, though,” he said, his tone easier, livelier, the tone 
of a confidence to a pal. “You should have seen Orren Boyle yester- 
day, when the first flash came through on the radio from Wyatt 
Junction! He turned green — but 1 mean, green, the color of a fish 
that's been flying around too long! Do you know what he did last 
night, by way of taking the bad news 7 Hired himself a suite at the 
Valhalla Hotel — and you know what that is — and the last 1 heard, 
he was still there today, dnnking himself under the table and the 
beds, with a few choice friends of his and half the female population 
of upper Amsteidam Avenue!" 

“Who is Mr. Boyle?” she asked, stupefied. 

“Oh, a fat slob that’s inclined to overreach himself. A smart guy 
who gets too smart at times. You should have seen his face yester- 
day! I got a kick out of that. That — and Dr. Floyd Ferris. That 
smoothy didn't like it a bit, oh not a bit! — the elegant Dr. Ferris of 
the State Science Institute, the servant of the people, with the patent- 
leather vocabulary —but he carried it off pretty well, 1 must say, 
only you could see him squirming in every paragraph — 1 mean, that 
interview he gave out this morning, where he said. The country gave 
Rearden that Metal, now we expect him to give the country some- 
thing in return.’ That was pretty nifty, considering who’s been riding 
on the gravy train and , . . well, considering. That was belter than 
Bertram Scudder — Mr. Scudder couldn’t think of anything but ‘No 
comment,' when his fellow gentlemen of the press asked him to voice 
his sentiments. ‘No comment' — from Bertram Scudder who’s never 
been known to shut his trap from the day he was born, about any- 
thing you ask him or don't ask. Abyssinian poetry or the state of 
the ladies’ rest rooms in the textile industry! And Dr. Pritchett, the 
old fool, is going around saying that he knows for certain that Rear- 
den didn’t invent that Metal — because he was told, by an unnamed 
reliable source, that Rearden stole the formula from a penniless in- 
ventor whom he murdered!" 

He was chuckling happily. She was listening as to a lecture on 
higher mathematics, grasping nothing, not even the style of the lan- 
guage, a style which made the mystery greater, because she was 
certain that it did not mean — coming from him — what it would have 
meant anywhere else. 

He refilled his glass and drained it. but his gaiety vanished 
abruptly. He slumped into an armchair, facing her, looking up at her 
from under his bald forehead, his eyes blurred. 

“She’s coming back tomorrow,” he said, with a sound like a 
chuckle devoid of amusement. 

“Who?” 

“My sister. My dear sister. Oh, she’ll think she’s great, won’t she?” 

“You dislike your sister, Mr. Taggart?” He made the same sound; 
its, meaning was so eloquent that she needed no other answer, 
“Why?” she asked. 


247 



‘‘Because she thinks she's so good. What right has she to think 
it? What right has anybody to think he's good? Nobody's any good." 

“You don't mean it. Mr, Taggart/’ 

‘i mean, we’re only human beings — and what’s a human being? 
A weak, ugly, sinful creature, bom that way, rotten in his bones — 
so humility is the one virtue he ought to practice. He ought to spend 
his life on his knees, begging to be (orgiven for his dirty existence. 
When a man thinks he’s good — that’s when he’s rotten. Pride is the 
worst of all sins, no matter what he's done," 

“But if a man knows that what he’s done is good?" 

"Then he ought to apologize for it." 

"To whom?" 

"To those who haven’t done it." 

"I ... I don’t understand." 

"Of course you don’t. It takes years and yeais of study in the 
higher reaches of the intellect. Have you ever heard of The Meta- 
physical Contradictions of the Universe, by Dr. Simon Pritchett?" 
She shook her head, frightened, "How do you know what’s good, 
anyway? Who knows what’s good 7 Who can ever know? There are 
no absolutes — as Dr. Pritchett has proved irrefutably. Nothing is ab- 
solute. Everything is a matter ot opinion. How do you know that 
the bridge hasn’t collapsed? You only think it hasn’t. How do you 
know that there’s any bridge at all? You think that a system of 
philosophy — such as Dr. Pritchett's — is just something academic, re- 
mote, impractical? But it isn't. Oh. boy, how it isn’t!" 

"But, Mr. Taggart, the Tine you built—" 

“Oh, what's that Lino, anyway? It’s only a materia! achievement 
Is that of any importance 0 Is there any greatness in anything mate- 
rial? Only a low animal can gape at that bridge — when there are so 
many higher things in life. But do the higher things ever get recogni- 
tion? Oh no! Look at people. All that hue and cry and front pages 
about some trick arrangement of some scraps of matter. Do they 
care about any nobler issue? Do they ever give front pages to a 
phenomenon of the spirit? Do they notice or appreciate a person of 
finer sensibility? And you wonder whether it’s true that a great man 
is doomed to unhappiness m this depraved world!" He leaned for- 
ward, staring at her intently, i'll tell you . , . I ll tell you 
something . , unhappiness is the hallmark of virtue. If a man is 
unhappy, really, truly unhappy, it means that he is a superior sort 
of person." 

He saw the puzzled, anxious look ot her face. "But. Mr, Taggart, 
you got everything you wanted. Now you have the best railroad in 
the country, the newspapers call you the greatest business executive 
of the age, they say the stock of your company made a fortune lor 
you overnight, you got everything you could ask for — aren't you glad 
of it?" 

In the brief space of his answer, she felt frightened, (sensing a 
sudden fear within him. He answered, “No." 

She didn't know why her voice dropped to a whispqr. “You'd 
rather the bridge had collapsed?" 

248 



“I haven't said that!” he snapped sharply. Then he shrugged and 
waved his hand in a gesture of contempt. “You don’t understand.” 

*Tm sorry . . . Oh, I know that I have such ari awful lot to learn!” 

“I am talking about a hunger for something much beyond that 
bridge. A hunger that nothing material will ever satisfy.” 

“What, Mr. Taggart? What is it you want?” 

“Oh. there you go! The moment you ask, ‘What is it?’ you’re back 
in the crude, material world where everything's got to be tagged and 
measured. I’m speaking of things that can't be named in materialistic 
words . . . the higher realms of the spirit, which man can never 
reach. . . . What's any human achievement, anyway? The earth is 
only an atom whiiling in the universe —of what importance is that 
bridge to the solar system?" 

A sudden, happy look of understanding cleared her eyes. “It’s 
great of you, Mr. Taggart, to think that your own achievement isn’t 
good enough for you. I guess no matter how far youwe gone, you 
want to go still farther. You're ambitious. That's what I admire most: 
ambition. 1 mean, doing things, not stopping and giving up, but 
doing. 1 understand, Mr. Taggart . . . even if l don’t understand all 
the big thoughts.” 

“You'll learn.” 

“Oh, I'll work very hard to learn!” 

Her glance of admiration had not changed. He walked across the 
room, moving in that glance as in a gentle spotlight. He went to 
refill his glass. A mirror hung in the niche behind the portable bar. 
He caught a glimpse of his own figure: the tall body distorted by a 
sloppy, sagging posture, as if in deliberate negation of human grace, 
the thinning hair, the soft, sullen mouth it struck him suddenly that 
she did not see him at all: what she saw was the heroic figure of a 
builder, with pioudly straight shoulders and wind-blown hair. He 
chuckled aloud, feeling that this was a good joke on her. feeling 
dimly a satisfaction that resembled a sense of victory: the superiority 
of having put something over on her. 

Sipping his drink, he glanced at the door of his bedroom and 
thought of the usual ending for an adventure of this kind. He thought 
that it would be easy: the girl was too awed to resist. He saw the 
reddish -bronze sparkle of her hair— as she sat, head bent, under a 
light — and a wedge of smooth, glowing skin on her shoulder. He 
looked away. Why bother? he thought. 

The hint of desire that he felt was no more than a sense of physical 
discomfort. The sharpest impulse in his mind, nagging him to action, 
was not the thought of the girl, but of all the men who would not 
pass up an opportunity of this kind. He admitted to himself that she 
was a much better person than Betty Pope, perhaps the best person 
ever offered to him. The admission left him indifferent. He felt no 
more than he had felt for Betty Pope. He fell nothing. The prospect 
of experiencing pleasure was not worth the effort; he had no desire 
to experience pleasure. 

“It’s getting late,” he said. “Where do you live? Let me give you 
andther drink and then I’ll take you home.” 

When he said good-bye to her at the door of a miserable rooming 

249 



house in a slum neighborhood, she hesitated, fighting not to ask a 
question which she desperately wished to ask him. 

“Will 1 . . she began, and stopped. 

“What?” 

“No, nothing, nothing!'’ 

He knew that the question was: "Will I see you again?” it gave 
him pleasure not to answer, even though he knew that she would. 

She glanced up at him once more, as if it were perhaps for the 
last time, then said earnestly, her voice low. “Mr. Taggart, I’m very 
grateful to 'you. because you ... I mean, any other man would have 
tried to ... 1 mean, that’s all he’d want, but you’re so much better 
than that, oh, so much better!” 

He leaned closer to her with a faint, interested smile. “Would you 
have?” he asked. 

She drew back from him, in sudden terror at her own words. “Oh, 
I didn’t meaa it that way!” she gasped. “Oh God, 1 wasn’t hinting 
or ... or . . She blushed furiously, whirled around and ran, 
vanishing up the long, steep stairs of the rooming house. 

He stood on the sidewalk, feeling an odd, heavy, foggy sense of 
satisfaction: feeling as if he had committed an act of virtue— and as 
if he had taken his revenge upon every person who had stood cheer- 
ing along the three-hundred-milc track of the John Galt Line. 

♦ * 

When their train reached Philadelphia, Rcarden left her without 
a word, as if the nights of their return journey deserved no acknowl- 
edgment in the daylight reality of crowded station platforms and 
moving engines, the reality he respected. She went on to New York, 
alone. But late that evening, the doorbell of her apartment rang and 
Dagny knew that she had expected it. 

He said nothing when he entered, he looked at her, making his 
silent presence more intimate a greeting than words. There was the 
faint suggestion of a contemptuous smile in his face, at once admit- 
ting and mdeking his knowledge of her hours of impatience and his 
own. He stood in the middle of her living room, looking slowly 
around him; this was her apartment, the one place in the city that 
had been the focus of two years ot his torment, as the place be could 
not think about and did, the place he could not enter — and was now 
entering with the casual, unannounced right of an owner. He sat 
down in an armchair, stretching his legs forward — and she stood 
before him, almost as if she needed his permission to sit down and 
it gave her pleasure to wait. 

“Shall I tell you that you did a magnificent job, building that 
Line?” he asked. She glanced at him in astonishment; he had never 
paid her open compliments of that kind; the admiration ifr his voice 
was genuine, but the hint of mockery remained in his fa^e, and she 
felt as if he were speaking to some purpose which shd could not 
guess. “I’ve spent at! day answering questions about you-iand about 
the Line, the Metal and the future. That, and counting! the orders 
for the Metal. They’re coming in at the rate of thousand# of tons an 
hour. When was it, nine months ago?— I couldn’t get a single answer 
anywhere. Today, I had to cut off my phone, nol to listen to all the 

250 



people who wanted to speak to me personally about their urgent 
need of Rearden Metal. What did you do today?” 

“I don’t know. Tried to listen to Eddie’s reports — tried to get 
away from people — tried to find the rolling stock to put more trains 
on the John Galt Line, because the schedule I’d planned won’t be 
enough for the business that’s piled up in just three days,” 

“A great many people wanted to see you today, didn’t they?” 

“Why, yes,” 

‘They’d have given anything just for a word with you, wouldn’t 
they‘d” 

“I ... I suppose so.” 

“The reporters kept asking me what you were like. A young boy 
from a local sheet kept saying that you were a great woman. He 
said he’d be afraid to speak to you, if he ever had the chance. He’s 
right. That future that they're all talking and trembling about — it 
will be as you made it, because you had the courage none of them 
could conceive of. All the roads to wealth that they’re scrambling 
for now, it’s your strength that broke them open. The strength to 
stand against everyone. The strength to recognize no will but your 
own.” 

She caught the sinking gasp ol her breath, she knew his purpose. 
She stood straight, her arms at her sides, her face austere, as if in 
unflinching endurance: she stood under the praise as under a lashing 
of insults. 

“They kept asking you questions, too. didn't they?” He spoke 
intently, leaning forward. “And they looked at you with admiration, 
t hey looked, as it you stood on a mountain peak and they could only 
take their hats off to you across the great distance. Didn’t they?” 

“Yes.’’ she whispered. 

“They looked as if they knew that one may not approach you or 
speak in your presence or touch a fold of yout dress. They knew it 
and it's true. They looked at you with respect, didn't they? They 
looked up to you?” 

He seized her aim, threw her down on her knees, twisting her 
body against his legs, and bent down to kiss her mouth. She laughed 
soundlessly, her laughter mocking, but her eyes half-closed, veiled 
with pleasure. 

Hours later, when they lay in bed together, his hand moving over 
her body, he asked suddenly, throwing her back against the curve 
of his arm, bending over her— and she knew, by the intensity of his 
lace, by the sound of a gasp somewhere in the quality of his voice, 
even though his voice was low and steady, that the question broke 
out of him as if it were worn by the hours of torture he had spent 
with it: 

“Who were the other men that had you?” 

He looked at her as if the question were a sight visualized in every 
detail, a sight he loathed, but would not abandon: she heard the 
contempt in his voice, the hatred, the suffering — and an odd eager- 
ness that did not pertain to torture; he had asked the question, hold- 
ing her body tight against him. 

She answered evenly, but he saw a dangerous flicker in her eyes, 

251 



as of a warning that she understood him too well. “There was only 
one other. Hank.” 

“When?” 

“When I was seventeen.” 

“Did it last?” 

“For some years.” 

“Who was he?” 

She drew back, lying against his arm; he leaned closer, his face 
taut; she held his eyes. “1 won’t answer you,” 

“Did you love him?” 

“I won't answer.” 

“Did you like sleeping with him?” 

“Yes!” 

The laughter in her eyes made it sound like a slap across his face, 
the laughter of her knowledge that this was the answer he dreaded 
and wanted. 

He twisted her arms behind her, holding her helpless, her breasts 
pressed against him; she felt the pain ripping through her shoulders, 
she heard the anger in his words and the huskiness of pleasure in 
his voice: “Who was he?” 

She did not answer, she looked at him, her eyes dark and oddly 
brilliant, and he saw that the shape of her mouth, distorted by pain, 
was the shape of a mocking smile. 

He felt it change to a shape of surrender, under the touch of his 
lips. He held her body as if the violence and the despair of the way 
he took her could wipe his unknown rival out of existence, out ot 
her past, and more: as if it could transform any part of her, even 
the rival, into an instrument of his pleasure. He knew, by the eager- 
ness of her movement as her arms seized him, that this was the way 
she wanted to be taken. 

* * 

The silhouette of a conveyor belt moved against the strips of fire 
in the sky* raising coal to the top of a distant tower, as if an inex- 
haustible number of small black buckets rode out of the earth in a 
diagonal line across the sunset. The harsh, distant clatter kept going 
through the rattle of the chains which a young man in blue overalls 
was fastening over the machinery, securing it to »he flatcars lined on 
the siding of the Quinn Ball Bearing Company of Connecticut. 

Mr. Mowen, of the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company 
across the street, stood by, watching. He had stopped to watch, on 
his way home from his own plant. He wore a light overcoat stretched 
over his short, paunchy figure, and a derby hat over his graying, 
blondish head. There was a first touch of September chill in the air. 
All the gates of the Quinn plant buildings stood wide i open, while 
men and cranes moved the machinery out; like taking ;thc vital or- 
gans and leaving a carcass, thought Mr. Mowen. 

“Another one?” asked Mr, Mowen, jerking his thumb: at the plant, 
even though he knew the answer. 

“Huh?” asked the young man, who had not notice^ him stand- 
ing there. 

“Another company moving to Colorado?” 

252 



“Uh-huh” 

“It’s the third one from Connecticut in the last two weeks/' said 
Mr. Mowen. “And when you look at what's happening in New Jer- 
sey, Rhode Island, Massachusetts and all along the Atlantic 
coast * . The young man was not looking and did not seem to 
listen. “It’s like a leaking faucet/’ said Mr. Mowen, “and all the 
water's running out to Colorado. All the money/' The young man 
flung the chain across and followed it deftly, climbing over the big 
shape covered with canvas. “You'd think people would have some 
feeling for their native state, some loyalty . . . But they're running 
away. 1 don't know what’s happening to people.’’ 

“It’s the Bill,” said the young man. 

“What Bill?" 

“The Equalization of Opportunity Bill ’’ 

“How do you mean?" 

“I hear Mr. Quinn was making plans a year ago to open a branch 
in Colorado. The Bill knocked that out cold. So now he's made up 
his mind to move there, lock, stock and barrel/’ 

“1 don’t see where that makes it right. The Bill was necessary. It's 
a rotten shame — old firms that have been here for generations . . . 
There ought to be a law ..." 

The young man worked swiftly, competently, as if he enjoyed it. 
Behind him, the conveyor belt kept using and clattering against the 
skv. Four distant smokestacks stood like flagpoles, with coils of 
smoke weaving slowly about them, like long banners at half-mast in 
the reddish glow of the evening. 

Mr. Mowen had lived with every smokestack of that skyline since 
the days of Ins father and grandfather. He had seen the conveyor 
belt from his office window for thirty years. That the Qumn Ball 
Bearing Company should vanish from across the street had seemed 
inconceivable; he had known about Quinn's decision and had not 
believed it; or rather, he had believed it as he believed any words 
he heard or spoke: as sounds that bore no fixed relation to physical 
reality. Now he knew that it was real. He stood by the flatcars on 
the siding as if he still had a chance to stop them. 

“ft isn’t right," he said; he was speaking to the skyline at large, 
but the young man above was the only part of it that could hear 
him, “That’s not the way it was in my father’s time. I’m not a big 
shot. I don't want to fight anybody. What’s the matter with the 
world?" There was no answer. “Now you. for instance — are they 
taking you along to Colorado?" 

“Me? No. I don't work here I’m just transient labor. Just picked 
up this job helping to lug the stuff out," 

“Welt, where are you going to go when they move away?" 

“Haven’t any idea." 

“What arc you going to do, if more of them move out?" 

“Wait and see." 

Mr. Mowen glanced up dubiously: he could not tell whether the 
answer was intended to apply to him or to the young man. But the 
youiig man’s attention was fixed on his task; he was not looking 
down. He moved on to the shrouded shapes on the next flatcar, and 

253 



Mr. Mowen followed, looking up at him, pleading with something 
up in space: ‘Tvc got rights, haven’t I? 1 was born here. 1 expected 
the old companies to be here when I grew up. I expected to run the 
plant like my father did. A man is part of his community, he’s got 
a right to count on it, hasn’t he? . . . Something ought to be done 
about it.” 

“ About what?” 

“Oh, l know, you think it’s great, don’t you? — that Taggart boom 
and Rearden Metal and the gold rush to Colorado and the drunken 
spree out there, with Wyatt and his bunch expanding their produc- 
tion like kettles boiling over! Everybody thinks it’s great — that’s all 
you hear anywhere you go— people are slap-happy, making plans 
like six-year-olds on a vacation— you'd think it was a national honey- 
moon of some kind or a permanent Fourth ol July!” 

The young man said nothing. 

“Weil, 1 don’t think so,” said Mr. Mowen. He lowered his voice 
“The newspapers don't say so, cither— mind you that — the newspa- 
pers aren’t saying anything.” 

Mr. Mowen heard no answer, only the clanking of the chains 

“Why are they all running to Colorado?” he asked. “What have 
they got down there that we haven’t goC” 

The young man grinned. “Maybe it's something you've got that 
they haven’t got.” 

‘ What?” The young rnan did not answer “1 don’t see it It’s a 
backward, primitive, unenlightened place. They don't even have a 
modern government it's the worst government in any stale. I he 
la/iest It does nothing — outside ot keeping law courts and a police 
department. It doesn't do anything tor the people It doesn't help 
anybody. I-don’t see why all our best companies want to inn there.” 

The young man glanced down at him, but did not answer 

Mr. Mowen sighed. “Things aren’t right,” he said. “The Equaliza- 
tion of Opportunity Bill was a sound idea. There's got to be a chance 
for everybody. It’s a rotten shame if people like Quinn take unfair 
advantage o! it. Why didn't he let somebody else start manufacturing 
ball bearings in Colorado? . . I wish the Colorado people would 

leave us alone. I hat Stockton Foundry out there had no right going 
into ihe switch and signal business That’s been my business tor 
years. I have the right of seniority, it isn’t fair, it’s dog-eat-dog coni 
petition, newcomers shouldn’t be allowed to muscle m. Where am 1 
going to sell switches and signals? There were two big railroads out 
in Colorado Now the Phoeniv-Durango’s gone, so there's just Tag* 
gart Transcontinental left. It isn 't fair - their forcing Dan Conway 
out. There's got to be room for competition. . , . And I’ve been 
waiting six months for an order of steel from Orrcn Boyle — and now 
he says he can’t promise me anything, because Rearden Metal has 
shot his market to hell, there's a run on that MetaI,J Boyle has to 
retrench. It isn’t fair— Rearden being allowed to ruin jpther people's 
markets that way. . . . And 1 want to get some Reardlm Metal, too, 
I need it — but try and get it! He has a waiting line that would stretch 
across three states — nobody can get a scrap of it, except his old 
friends, people like Wyatt and Danagger and such. U isn’t fair. It’s 

254 



discrimination. I'm just as good as the next fellow. Vm entitled to 
my share of that Metal.” 

The young man looked up, “I was in Pennsylvania last week,” he 
said. ”[ saw the Reardon mills. There's a place that's busy! They’re 
building four new open-hearth furnaces, and they’ve got six more 
coming. . . . New furnaces,” he said, looking off to the south. ’No- 
body's built a new furnace on the Atlantic Coast for the last five 
y*‘ais. . . .” He stood against the sky, on the top of a shrouded 
motor, looking off at the dusk with a faint smile of eagerness and 
longing, as one looks at the distant vision of one’s love. ’They’re 
busy. . . he said. 

Then his smile vanished abruptly; the way he jerked the chain was 
the first break in the smooth competence of his movements: it looked 
like a jolt of anger. 

Mr Mowen looked at the skyline, at the belts, the wheels, the 
smoke -the smoke that settled heavily, peacefully across the evening 
air, stretching in a long ha/c all the way to the city of New York 
somewhere beyond the sunset— and he felt reassured by the thought 
of New Yoik in its ring of sacred fires, the ring of smokestacks, gas 
tanks, cranes and high tension lines. He felt a current of power 
flowing through every grirny structure of his familiar street; he liked 
the figure of the young man above him, there was something reassur- 
ing m the way he worked, something that blended with the 
skyline . . Yet Mr. Mowen wondeted why he felt that a crack w'as 
gmwing somewhere, eating through the solid, the eternal walls, 

‘ Something ought to be done.” said Mr. Mowen. “A friend of 
mine went out of business —last week— the oil business -had a cou- 
ple ol wells down in Oklahoma—couldn’t compete with Flhs Wyatt, 
h isn’t fair. They ought to leave the little people a chance. They 
ought to place a limit on Wyatt’s output. He shouldn’t be allowed 
to produce so much that he’ll swamp everybod\ else off the 
market. ... I got ^luck in Ncw> Yoik yesterday, had to leave my car 
then e and come home on a damn commuters' local, couldn't get any 
gas tor the car. they said there’s a shortage of oil in the city. . . . 
Things aren’t right. Something ought to be done about it , . 

1 ooking at the skyline, Mr. Mowen wondered what was the name- 
less threat to it and who was its destroyer. 

‘‘What do you want to do about it?” asked the young man. 

“Who, me?” said Mr, Mowen. ”1 wouldn’t know. I'm not a big 
^hot 1 can’t, solve national ptoblems. 1 just want to make a living. 
All J know is. somebody ought to do something about it. . . Things 
tiionT right. . . I islen what’s your name?” 

‘Owen Kellogg.” 

“Listen, Kellogg, what do you think is going to happen to the 
world?*' 

“You wouldn't care to know.” 

A whistle blew on a distant tower, the night-shift whistle, and Mr. 
Mowen realized that it was getting late. He sighed, buttoning his 
coat,. turning to go. 

“Well, things are being done,” he said. “Steps are being taken. 
Constructive steps. The Legislature has passed a Bill giving wider 

255 



powers to the Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources. 
They’ve appointed a very able man as Top Co-ordinator. Can’t say 
I’ve heard of him before, but the newspapers said he’s a man to be 
watched. His name is Wesley Mouch ” 

* * 

Dagny stood at the window of her living room, looking at the city. 
It was late and the lights were like the last sparks left glittering on 
the black remnants of a bonfire. 

She felt at peace, and she wished she could hold her mind still to 
let her own emotions catch up with her, to look at every moment 
of the month that had lushed past her. She had had no time to feet 
that she was back in her own office at Taggart Transcontinental; 
there had been so much to do that she forgot it was a return from 
exile. She had not noticed what Jim had said on her return or 
whether he had said anything. There had been only one person 
whose reaction she had wanted to know; she had telephoned the 
Wayne-Falkland Hotel; but So nor Francisco d’Anconia, she was told, 
had gone back to Buenos Aires 

She remembered the moment when she signed her name at the 
bottom of a long legal page: it was the moment that ended the John 
Galt Line. Now it was the Rio Norte Line of Taggart Transcontinen- 
tal again — except that the men of the tram crews refused to give up 
its name. She. too, lound it hard to give up; she forced herself not 
to call it “the John Galt." and wondered why that required an effort, 
and why she felt a faint wrench of sadness. 

One evening, on a sudden impulse, she had turned the comer of the 
Taggart Building, for a la<4 look at the office of John Gait. Inc., in the 
alley; she did not know what she wanted- just to see it, she thought. 
A plank barrier had been raised along the sidewalk: the old building 
was being demolished: it had given up, at last. She had climbed over 
the planks and. by the light of the street lamp that had once thrown 
a stranger’s shadow across the pavement, she had looked in through 
the window of her former office. Nothing was left of the ground 
floor; the partitions had been torn down, there were broken pipes 
hanging from the ceiling and a pile of rubble on the Hour. There 
was nothing to see. 

She had asked Reardon whether he had come there one night Iasi 
spring and stood outside her window, fighting his desire to enter. 
But she had known, even before he answered, that he had not. She 
did not tell him why she asked it. She did not know why that memory 
still disturbed her at times. 

Beyond the window of her living room, the lighted rectangle of 
the calendar hung like a small shipping tag in the black $ky. It read 
September 2. She smiled defiantly, remembering the r^ee she had 
run against its changing pages: there were no deadlines now. she 
thought, no barriers, no threats, no limits. 

She heard a key turning m lhe door of her apanmiM; this was 
the sound she had waited for, had wanted to hear tonigjht. 

Rearden came in, as he had come many times, using (he key she 
had given him, as sole announcement. He threw his hat and coal 

256 



down on a chair with a gesture that had become familiar; he wore 
the formal black of dinner clothes. 

“Hello,” she said. 

‘Tm still waiting for the evening when l won’t lind you in,” he 
answered. 

“Then you'll have to phone the offices of I aggart Transcontinental.” 

“Any evening? Nowhere else?” 

“Jealous, Hank?” 

“No. Curious what it would feel like, to be.” 

He stood looking at her across the room, refusing to let himself 
approach her, deliberately prolonging the pleasure of knowing that 
he could do it whenever he wished. She wore the tight gray skirt of 
an office suit and a blouse of transparent white cloth tailored like a 
man’s shirt: the blouse flared out above her waistline, stressing the 
trim flatness of her hips: against the glow of a lamp behind her, he 
could see the slender silhouette of her body within the flaring circle 
of the blouse. 

“How was the banquet?” she asked. 

“Fine. 1 escaped as soon as I could. Why didn’t you come? You 
were invited.” 

“1 didn’t want to see you in public ” 

He glanced at her, as if stressing that he noted the full meaning 
of her answer; then the lines of his face moved to the hint of an 
amused smile. “You missed a lot. The National Council of Metal 
Industries won’t put itself again through the ordeal of having me for 
guest of honor. Not if they can help it ” 

“What happened?” 

“Nothing. Just a lot of speeches.” 

“W'as it an ordeal for you?” 

“No ... Yes, in a way ... I had really wanted to enjoy it.” 

“Shall I get you a dunk?” 

“Yes, will you?” 

She turned to go. He stopped her, grasping her shoulders from 
behind; he bent her head back and kissed her mouth When he raised 
his head, she pulled it down again with a demanding gesture of 
ownership, as it stressing her right to do it Then she stepped away 
from him. 

“Never mind the drink,” he said. “1 didn't really want it — except 
tor seeing you wait on me.” 

“Well, then, let me wait on you.” 

“No.” 

He smiled, stretching himself out on the couch, his hands crossed 
under his head. He felt at home: it was the first home he had ever 
tound. 

“You know, the worst part ot the banquet was that the only wish 
of every person present was to get it over with*” he said, “What 1 
can’t understand is why they wanted to do it at all. They didn’t have 
to Certainly not for my sake.” 

She picked up a cigarette box, extended it to him, then held the 
flame of a lighter to the tip of his cigarette, in the deliberate manner 

751 



of wailing on him. She smiled in answer to his chuckle, then sat 
down on the arm of a chair across the room. 

"‘Why did you accept their invitation. Hank?” she asked, “You’ve 
always refused to join them,” 

“I didn't want to refuse a peace offer — when I’ve beaten them 
and they know it. I'll never join them, but an invitation to appear 
as a guest of honor— well. I thought they were good losers. J thought 
it was generous of them.” 

“Of them ?” 

“Are you going to say: of meT' 

“Hank! After all the things they've done to stop you--'’ 

“1 won. didn’t I? So l thought . . . You know, I didn’t hold it 
against them that they couldn't see the value of the Metal sooner — 
so long as they saw it at last. Hvery man learns in his own way and 
time. Sure, I knew' there was a lot of cowardice there, and envy and 
hypocrisy, but I thought that that was only the surface- now. when 
I've proved my ease, when I’ve proved it so loudly! — I thought their 
real motive for inviting me was their appreciation ot the Metal, 
and — ” 

She smiled in the brief space of his pause: she knew the sentence 
he had stopped himself from uttering: “—and for that, I would for- 
give anyone anything 

“But it wasn’t,” he said. “And I couldn’t figure out what their 
motive was. Dagny, I don't think they had any motive at all. They 
didn’t give that banquet to please me, or to gain something from 
me, or to save face with the public. There was no purpose of any 
kind about it, no meaning. They didn't really care when they de- 
nounced the Metal — and they don't care now. They’re not really 
afraid that 1’il drive them all off the market — they don't care enough 
even about that Do you know what that banquet was like? It's as 
if they’d heard that there are values one is supposed to honor and 
this is what one does to honor them-— so they went through the 
motions, like ghosts pulled by some sort of distant echoes from a 
better age. 1 . . . J couldn't stand it.” 

She said, her face tight. “And you don't think you’re generous!” 

He glanced up at her: his eyes brightened to a look of amusement 
“Why do they make you so angry '” 

She said, her voice low' to hide the sound of tenderness, “You 
wanted to enjoy it , . 

“It probably serves me right. I shouldn't have expected anything 
I don’t know what it was that 1 wanted.” 

“J do.” 

“I've never liked occasions of that sort. 1 don’t see why I expected 
it to be different, this time. . . . You know, 1 went tfiere feeling 
almost as if the Metal had changed everything, even people.” 

“Oh yes. Hank, I know!” 

“Well, it was the wrong place to seek anything, . . . Do^you remem- 
ber? You said once that celebrations should be only fo&r those who 
have something to celebrate.” 

The dot of her lighted cigarette stopped in mid-air; she sat still 

258 



She had never spoken to him of that party or of anything related to 
his home. In a moment, she answered quietly, “I remember/'* 

“1 know what you meant ... I knew it then, too/* 

He was looking straight at her. She lowered her eyes. 

He remained silent; when he spoke again, his voice was gay. ‘The 
worst thing about people is not the insults they hand out, but the 
compliments. I couldn’t bear the kind they spouted tonight, particu- 
larly when they kept saying how much everybody needs me — they, 
the city, the country and the whole world, 1 guess. Apparently, their 
idea of the height of glory is to deal with people who need them. 

1 can’t stand people who need me/’ He glanced at her. “Do you 
need me?” 

She answered, her voice earnest. “Desperately/’ 

He laughed. “No Not the way I meant. You didn't say it the way 
they do/' 

‘How did 1 say it?" 

“Like a trader— who pays for what he wants. They say it like 
beggars who use a tin cup as a claim check ” 

“I . . . pay for it, Hank?" 

“Don’t look innocent You know exactly what 1 mean/’ 

“Yes,” she whispered; she was smiling. 

“Oh. to hell with them!" he said happily, stretching his legs, shift- 
ing the position of his body on the couch, stressing the luxury of 
relaxation. “I'm no good as a public figure. Anyway, it doesn't matter 
imvv. We don’t have to care what they see or don't see. They'll leave 
us alone. It's clear track ahead What’s the next undertaking, Mr. 
Vice-President?” 

“A transcontinental track of Rcaiden Metal.” 

“How soon do you want it?” 

“Tomortow morning. Three years from now is when I'll get it.” 

4,1 Think you can do it in three years?” 

“If the John Cialt . . it the Rio Norte Line does as well as it’s 
doing now.” 

“It's going to do better. 1 hat’s only the beginning.” 

“1 have an installment plan made out. As the money comes in, 
!’m going to start tearing up the main track, one division at a time, 
and replacing it with Rearden Metal rail ” 

“Okay Any time you wish to start. ' 

“I'll keep moving the old rail to the branch lines— they won’t last 
much longer, if I don't, In three years, you’ll ride on your own Metal 
into San Francisco, if somebody wants to give you a banquet there/’ 
“In three years. I’ll have nulls pouring Rearden Metal in Colorado, 
in Michigan and in Idaho. That's my installment plan.” 

“Your own mills? Branches?” 

"Uh-huh.” 

“What about the Equalisation of Opportunity Bill?” 

“You don’t think it's going to exist three years from now, do you? 
We’ve given them such a demonstration that all that rot is going to 
be swept away, llie whole country is with us. Who’ll want to slop 
things now? Who'll listen to the bilge? There's a lobby of the better 

259 



kind of men working in Washington right this moment. They're going 
to get the Equalization Bill scrapped at the next session." 

"I ... 1 hope so." 

"I’ve had a terrible time, these last few weeks, getting the new 
furnaces started, but it’s all set now, they’re being built, 1 can sit 
back and take it easy. 1 can sit at my desk, rake in the money, loaf 
like a bum, watch the orders for the Metal pouring in and play 
favorites all over the place. . . . Say, what’s the first train you’ve got 
for Philadelphia tomorrow morning?" 

“Oh, I don’t know." 

“You don’t? What's the use of an Operating Vice-President? I 
have to be at the mills by seven tomorrow Got anything running 
around six?" 

“Five-thirty *m. is the first one. I think." 

“Will you wake me up in time to make it or would you rather 
order the train held for me?" 

“I'll wake you up." 

She sat, watching him as he remained silent. He had looked tired 
when he came in; the lines of exhaustion were gone from his face 
now. 

“Dagny" he asked suddenly, his tone had changed, there was 
some hidden, earnest note in his voice, “why didn’t you want to see 
me in public?" 

“I don’t want to be part of your . . . official life." 

He did not answer; in a moment, he asked casually. “When did 
you take a vacation last?" 

“I think it was two . . no, three years ago." 

“What did you do?" 

“Went to the Adirondacks for a month Came back in a week." 

“I did that live yean ago. Only it was Oregon" He lay flat on his 
back, looking at the ceiling. “Dagny, let’s take a vacation together. 
Let’s take, my car and drive away for a few weeks, anywhere, just 
drive, down the back roads, where no one knows us. We’ll leave no 
address, wc won’t look at a newspaper, we won't touch a phone-- 
we won’t have any official life at all.” 

She got up. She approached him, she stood by the side of the 
couch, looking down at him, the light of the lamp behind her; she 
did not want him to see her face and the effort she was making not 
to smile. 

“You can take a few weeks off, can't you?" he said. “Things are 
set and going now. It’s safe. We won’t have another chance in the 
next three years.” 

“All right. Hank,” she said, forcing her voice to sound calmly 
toneless. 

“Will you?” 

“When do you want to start?” 

“Monday morning.” 

“All right.” 

She turned to step away. He seized her wrist, pulled her down, 
swung her body to lie stretched full-length on top of him, he held 
her still, uncomfortably, as she had fallen, his one hand in her hair, 

260 



pressing her mouth to his, his other hand moving from the shoulder 
blades under her thin blouse to her waist, to her legs* She whispered, 
'‘And you say 1 don't need you * . . !" 

She pulled herself away from him, and stood up, brushing her hair 
off her face. He lay still, looking up at her, his eyes narrowed, the 
bright flicker of some particular interest in his eyes, intent and faintly 
mocking. She glanced down: a strap of her slip had broken, the slip 
hung diagonally from her one shoulder to her side, and he was look- 
ing at her breast under the transparent film of the blouse. She raised 
her hand to adjust the strap. He slapped her hand down. She smiled, 
in understanding, in answering mockery. She walked slowly, deliber- 
ately across the room and leaned against a table, facing him, her 
hands holding the table's edge, her shoulders thrown back. It was 
the contrast he liked— the severity of her clothes and the half-naked 
body, the railroad executive who was a woman he owned. 

He sat up; he sat leaning comfortably across the couch, his legs 
eiossed and stretched forward, his hands in his pockets, looking at 
her with the glance of a property appraisal. 

“Did you say you wanted a transcontinental track of Rearden 
Metal. Mr. Vice-President?" he asked. “What if 1 don't give it to 
you? I can choose my customers now and demand any price l please. 
If this were a year ago. I would have demanded that you sleep with 
me in exchange '' 

“1 wish you had." 

“Would you have done it?" 

'Of course " 

“As a matter ot business* As a sale?" 

“It you were the buyer You would have liked that, wouldn't 
vou?" 

'Would you?" 

"Yes . . " she whispered. 

He approached her, he grasped her shoulders and pressed his 
mouth to her breast through the thin cloth. 

Then, holding her, he looked at her silently for a long moment. 
“What did you do with that bracelet?" he asked. 

They had never referred to it; she had to let a moment pass to 
regain the steadiness of her voice. “I have it." she answered. 

"I want you to wear it." 

“It anyone guesses, it will be worse for you than for me." 

"Weat it.'* 

She brought out the bracelet of Rearden Metal. She extended it 
to him without a word; looking straight at him, the green-blue chain 
glittering across her palm. Holding her glance, he clasped the brace- 
let on her wrist. In the moment when the clasp clicked shut under 
his fingers, she bent her head down to them and kissed his hand. 

* * 

The earth went flowing under the hood of the car. Uncoiling from 
among the curves of Wisconsin’s hills, the highway was the only 
evidence of human labor, a precarious bridge stretched across a sea 
of brush, weeds and trees. The sen rolled softly, in sprays of yellow 
<ind orange, with a few red jets shooting up on the hillsides, with 

2ft 1 



pools of remnant green in the hollows, under a pure blue sky. Among 
the colors of a picture post card, the car’s hood looked like the work 
of a jeweler, with the sun sparkling on its chromium steel, and its 
black enamel reflecting the sky. 

Dagny leaned against the center of the side window, her legs 
stretched forward; she liked the wide, comfortable space of the car’s 
seat and the warmth of the sun on her shoulders; she thought that 
the countryside was beautiful. 

“What I’d like to see," said Rearden, “is a billboard." 

She laughed: he had answered her silent thought “Selling what 
and to whom? We haven't seen a car or a house for an hour." 

“'I'hat’s what l don’t like about it." He bent forward a little, his 
hands on the wheel; he was frowning. “Look at that road." 

The long strip of concrete was bleached to the powdery gray ot 
bones left on a desert, as if sun and snows had eaten away the traces 
of tires, oil and carbon, the lustrous polish of motion. Green weeds 
rose from the angular cracks of the concrete. No one had used the 
road or repaired it for many years; but the cracks were few. 

“It's a good road." said Rearden. “It was built to last. I he man 
who built it must have had a good reason tor expecting it to cairv 
a heavy traffic in the years ahead." 

“Yes ..." 

' [ don't like the looks of this." 

“I don't either" Then she smiled “Hut think how often we’ve 
heard people complain that billboards rum the appearance ot the 
countryside. Welt, there's the unruined countryside for them to ad- 
mire." She added. “They're the people I hate " 

She did not want to feel the uneasiness which she tell like a thm 
crack under her enjoyment of this day She had fell that uneasiness 
at times, in the last three weeks, at the sight of the country streaming 
past the wedge ot the car’s hood. She smiled: it was the hood that 
had becnjthe immovable point in her field of vision, while the earth 
had gone by, it was the hood that had been the center, the focus, 
the security in a blurred, dissolving world the hood before her 
and Rearden’s hands on the wheel by her side . . she smiled, think 
ing that she was satisfied to let this be the shape of her world 

After the first week of their wandering, wher. they had driven at 
random, at the mercy of unknown crossroads, he had said to her 
one morning as they started out, “Dagny, does resting have to be 
purposeless?” She had laughed, answering, “No. What factory do 
you want to see?" He had smiled— at the guilt he dul not have to 
assume, at the explanations he did not have to give -and he had 
answered, “It’s an abandoned ore mine around Saginaw Hay, that 
I've heard about. They say it’s exhausted.” 

They had driven across Michigan to the ore mine. They had 
walked through the ledges of an empty pit. with the Remnants of a 
crane like a skeleton bending above them against the sjty, and some- 
one’s rusted lunchbox clattering away from under theirffeet. She had 
felt a stab of uneasiness, sharper than sadness — but { Rearden had 
said cheerfully, “Exhausted, hell! I’ll show them how many tons and 
dollars I can draw out of this place!" On their way back to the air. 

262 



he had said, ‘if I could find the right man. Pd buy that mine for 
him tomorrow morning and set him up to work it.” 

The next day, when they were driving west and south, toward the 
plains of Illinois, he had said suddenly, after a long silence, “No, Pll 
have to wait till they junk the Bill. The man who could work that 
mine wouldn’t need me to teach him. The man who’d need me, 
wouldn’t be worth a damn.” 

They could speak of their work, as they always had, with full 
confidence in being understood. But they neve* spoke of each other. 
He acted as if their passionate intimacy were a nameless physical 
fact, not to be identified in the communication between two minds. 
Each night, it was as if she lay in the arms of a stranger who let her 
see every shudder of sensation that ran through his body, but would 
never permit her to know whether the shocks reached any answering 
tremor within him. She lay naked at his side, but on her wrist there 
was the bracelet of Rearden Metal. 

She knew that he hated the ordeal of signing the “Mr. and Mrs. 
Smith” on the registers of squalid roadside hotels. There were eve- 
nings when she noticed the faint contraction of anger in the tightness 
of his mouth, as he signed the expected names of the expected fraud, 
anger at those who made fraud necessary. She noticed, indifferently, 
the air of knowing slyness in the manner of the hotel clerks, which 
seemed to suggest that guests and clerks alike were accomplices in 
a shameful guilt the guilt of seeking pleasure. But she knew that it 
did not matter to him when they were alone, when he held her 
against him for a moment and she saw his eyes look alive and 
guiltless. 

They drove through small towns, thiough obscure side roads, 
through ths kind of places they had not seen for years, She fell 
uneasiness at the sight of the towns Days passed before she realized 
what it was that she missed most: a glimpse of fte.sh paint. The 
houses stood like men in impressed suits, who had lost the desire to 
stand straight: the cornices were like sagging shoulders, the crooked 
porch steps like loin hem lines, the broken windows like patches, 
mended with clapboard, fhe people in the streets stared at the new 
cai, not as one stares at a rare sight, but as if the glittering black 
shape were an impossible vision from anothet world There were 
tew vehicles in the streets and too many of them were horsedrawn. 
She had forgotten the literal shape and usage of horsepower; she did 
not like to sec its return. 

She did not laugh, that day at the grade crossing, when Rearden 
chuckled, pointing, and she saw the tram of a small local railroad 
come tottering from behind a hill, drawn by an ancient locomotive 
i hat coughed black smoke through a tall slack. 

“Oh Ciod, Hank, it's not funny!” 

*‘l know,” he said. 

They were seventy miles and an hour away from it, when she said. 

Hank, do you see the Taggart Comet being pulled across the conti- 
nent by a coal-burner of that kind?” 

“What’s the matter with you? Pull yourself together.” 

“Pm sorry . . . It’s just that l keep thinking it won't be any use, 

263 



ait my new track and all your new furnaces, if we don’t find someone 
able to produce Diesel engines. If we don’t find him fast/’ 

“Ted NieLsen of Colorado is your man/’ 

“Yes, if he finds a way to open his new plant. He’s sunk more 
money than he should into the bonds of the John Galt Line," 

“That’s turned out to be a pretty profitable investment, hasn't it?” 

“YCvS. but it's held him up Now he's ready to go ahead, but he 
can’t find the tools. There are no machine tools to buy, not any- 
where, not at any price. He's getting nothing but promises and de- 
lays. He's combing the country, looking for old junk to reclaim from 
dosed factories. If he doesn’t start soon—” 

“He will. Who’s going to stop him now?” 

“Hank,” she said suddenly, “could we go to a place I'd like to 
see?” 

“Sure. Anywhere. Which place?” 

“It’s in Wisconsin. There used to be a great motor company there, 
in my father’s time. We had a branch line serving it, but we dosed 
the line — about seven years ago— when they closed the factory. I 
think it's one of those blighted areas now. Maybe there’s still some 
machinery left there that fed Nielsen could use. It might have been 
overlooked — the place is forgotten and there's no transportation to 
it at all.” 

“I’ll find it. What was the name of the factory?” 

“The Twentieth Century Motor Company ” 

“Oh, of course I Thai was one of the best motor firms in my youth, 
perhaps the best. I seem to remember that there was something odd 
about the way it went out of business . . can't recall what it was.” 

It took them three days of inquiries, but they found the bleached, 
abandoned road — and now they were driving through the yellow 
leaves that glittered like a sea of gold coins, to the Twentieth Cen- 
tury Motor Company. 

“Hank,*what if anything happens to Ted Nielsen?” she asked sud- 
denly, as they drove in silence 

“Why should anything happen to him?” 

“1 don’t know, but . . . well, there was Dwight Sanders. He van 
ished. United Locomotives is done for now. And the other plants 
are in no condition to produce Diesels. I’ve stopped listening to 
promises. And . . . and of what use is a railroad without motive 
power?” 

“Of what use is anything, for that matter, without it?” 

The leaves sparkled, swaying in the wind. They spread for miles, 
from grass to brush to trees, with the motion and ail the colors of 
fire: they seemed to celebrate an accomplished purpose, burning in 
unchecked, untouched abundance. 

Rearden smiled. “There’s something to be said for thjb wilderness 
I’m beginning to like it. New country that nobody’s discovered.” She 
nodded gaily. “It’s good soil — look at the way things gifow, I’d dear 
that brush and I’d build a — ” 

And then they stopped smiling. The corpse they saw in the weeds 
by the roadside was a rusty cylinder with bits of glass— the remnant 
of a gas-station pump. 


264 



It was the only thing left visible. The few charred posts, the slab 
of concrete and the sparkle of glass dust — which had been a gas 
station — were swallowed in the brush, not to be noticed except by a 
careful glance, not to be seen at all in another year. 

They looked away. They drove on, not wanting to know what else 
lay hidden under the miles of weeds. They lelt the same wonder like 
a weight in the silence between them: wondci as to how much the 
weeds had swallowed and how fast. 

The road ended abruptly behind the turn of a hill. What remained 
was a few chunks ut concrete sticking out of a long, pitted stretch 
ot tar and mud. The concrete had been smashed by someone and 
carted away; even weeds could not grow in the strip of earth left 
behind. On the crest ol a distant hill, a single telegraph pole stood 
slanted against the sky, like a cioss over a vast grave 

It took them three hours and a punctured tire to crawl in low gear 
through trackless soil, through gullies, then down ruts left bv cart 
wheels— to reach the settlement that lay in the valley beyond the 
hill with the telegraph pole. 

A few houses still stood within the skeleton of what had once 
been an industrial town. Everything that could move, had moved 
away; but some human beings had remained. The empty structures 
were vertical rubble; they had been eaten, not by tune, but by men: 
boards torn out at random, missing patches ol roofs, holes left in 
gutted cellars. It looked as it blind hands had seized whatever fitted 
the need of the moment, with no concept of remaining in existence 
the next morning The inhabited houses wetc scattered at random 
among the ruins; the smoke of their chimneys was the only move- 
ment visible in town. A shell of concrete, which had been a school- 
house, stood on the outskirts; it looked like a skull. w r ith the empty 
sockets ot glassless windows, with a few strands of hair still clinging 
to it, in the shape of broken wires 

Beyond the town, on a distant hill, stood the factory of the Twenti- 
eth C entury Motor C ompany. Its walls, roof lines and smokestacks 
looked trim, impregnable like a fortress. H would have seemed intact 
but for a silver water tank, the water lank was tipped sidewise. 

They saw no trace of a road to the factory in the tangled miles of 
trees and hillsides They drove to the door of the tirst house in sight 
that showed a feeble signal of rising smoke. The door was open. An 
old woman came shuffling oat at the sound of the motor. She was 
bent and swollen, barefooted, dressed in a garment of flour sacking. 
She looked at the car without astonishment, without curiosity; it was 
the blank stare of a being who had lost the capacity to feel anything 
but exhaustion, 

“Can you tell me the way to the factory?" asked Rearden. 

The woman did not answer at once; she looked as it she would 
be unable to speak English. “What factory?" she asked. 

Rearden pointed, “That one." 

“it’s closed." 

“1 know it’s dosed. But is there any way to get there?" 

“I don't know. 1 ' 

“Is there any sort of road?" 


265 



’"There’s roads in the woods," 

“Any for a car to drive through?" 

“Maybe." 

“Well, which would be the best road to take?" 

“I don’t know." 

Through the open door, they could see the interior of her house. 
There was a useless gas stove, its oven stuffed with rags, serving as 
a chest of drawers, Ibere was a stove built of stones in a comer, 
with a few logs burning under an old kettle, and long streaks of soot 
rising up the wall. A white object lay propped against the legs of a 
table: it was a porcelain washbowl, torn from the wall of some bath- 
room, filled with wilted cabbages. A tallow candle stood in a bottle 
on the table. There was no paint left on the floor; its boards were 
scrubbed to a soggy gray that looked like the visual expression of 
the pain in the bones of the person who had bent and scrubbed 
and lost the battle against the grime now soaked into the grain of 
the boards. 

A brood of ragged childien had gathered at the dour behind the 
woman, silently, one by one. They stared at the car. not with the 
bright curiosity of children, but with the tension of savages ready to 
vanish at the first sign of danger. 

“How many miles is it to the factory?" asked Reardon. 

“Ten miles,” said the woman, and added, “Maybe five ” 

“How far is the next town?” 

“There ain’t any next town." 

“There are other towns somewhere. I mean, how far'*" 

“Yeah, Somewhere.’ ’ 

In the vacant space by the side ot the house, they saw faded rags 
hanging on a clothesline, which was a piece ot lelegtaph wire I hree 
chickens pecked among the beds of a scraggly vegetable garden; a 
fourth sat roosting on a bar which was a length of plumber's pipe 
Two pigs waddled in a stictch of mud and refuse, the stepping stones 
laid across the muck were pieces of the highway’s concrete. 

They heard a screeching sound in the distance and saw a man 
drawing water from a public well by means of a rope pulley 1'hcy 
watched him as he came slowly down the street He carried two 
buckets that seemed too heavy tor his thin arms. One could not tell 
his age. He approached and stopped, looking at the car. His eyes 
darted at the strangers, then away, suspicious and furtive. 

Rearden took out a ten-dollar bill and extended it to him, asking, 
“Would you please tell us the way to the factory?” 

The man stared at the money with sullen indifference, not moving, 
not lifting a hand for it. still clutching the two buckets If 6nc were 
ever to see a man devoid of greed, thought Dagny. there foe was. 

“We don’t need no money around here.” he said. 

"Don’t you work for a living?” 

“Yeah." 

“Well, what do you use for money?" 

The man put the buckets down, as it it had just occurred to him 
that he did not have to stand straining under thetr weight, “We don’t 
use no money," he said. “We just trade things amongst iw" 

266 



“How do you trade with people from other towns?’ 1 
“We don’t go to no other towns.” 

“You don’t seem to have it easy here.” 

“What’s that to you?” 

“Nothing, Just curiosity. Why do you people stay here?” 

“My old man use to have a grocery store here. Only the factory 
closed,” 

“Why didn't you move?” 

“Where to?” 

“Anywhere.” 

“What tor?” 

Dagny was staring at the two buckets: they were square tins with 
rope handles: they had been oil cans. 

“l isten,” said Kearden. “can you tell us whether there's a road 
to the factory?" 

“There’s plenty of roads.” 

“Is there one that a car can take?' 

“I guess so ” 

“Which one?” 

The man weighed the problem earnestly for some moments. “Well, 
now if you turn to the left by the schoolhouse,” he said, “and go on 
till you come to the crooked oak, there’s a road up there that's Ime 
when a don't ram toi a couple ot weeks.” 

‘W hen did it ram last? ' 

“Yesterday, ' 

“Is there another road?” 

‘ Well, you could go through Hanson's pasture and across the 
woods and then there's a good, solid toad there, all the way down 
to the deck ” 

“In then* a budge across the creek?” 

'No? 

What are the other roads * 

‘Well, il it’s a car road that you want, there's one the other side 
ul Miller's patch, it’s paved. U s the best road for a ear. you just turn 
U> the tight by the schoolhouse and- 
“But that road doesn't go to the factory, does u”” 

“No, not to the factory 

“All right,” said Rcarden. “tiuess we'll find our own way.” 

He hail pressed the slat let, when a rock came smashing into the 
windshield: The glass was shatterproof, but a sunburst of cracks 
spread across it. They saw a tagged little hoodlum vanishing behind 
,i comer with a scream ot laughter, and they heard the shrill laughter 
ot children answering him I mm behind some windows or crevices, 
Kearden suppressed a swear word. The man looked vapidly across 
the street, frowning a little. I he old woman looked on. without reac- 
tion, She had stood there silently, watching, without interest or pur 
pose, like a chemical compound on a photographic plate, absorbing 
visual shapes because they were there to be absorbed, but unable 
ever to form any estimate of the objects of her vision, 

Dagny had been studying her for some minutes. The swollen 
shapelessness of the woman’s body did not look like the product of 

267 



age and neglect: it looked as if she was pregnant. This seemed impos- 
sible, but glancing closer Dagny saw that her dust-colored hair was 
not gray and that there were few wrinkles on her face; it was only 
the vacant eyes, the stooped shoulders, the shuffling movements that 
gave her the stamp of senility. 

Dagny leaned out and asked, “How old are you?'* 

The woman looked at her, not in resentment, but merely as one 
looks at a pointless question. “Thirty-seven,” she answered. 

They had driven five former blocks away, when Dagny spoke, 

“Hank,” she said in terror, “that woman is only two years older 
than 1!” 

“Yes.” 

“God, how did they ever come to such a state?” 

He shrugged, “Who is John Galt?” 

The last thing they saw, as they left the town, was a billboard. A 
design was still visible on its peeling strips, imprinted in the dead 
gray that had once been color. It advertised a washing machine. 

In a distant field, beyond the town, they saw the figuie of a man 
moving slowly, contorted by the ugliness of a physical effort beyond 
the proper use of a human body: he was pushing a plow by hand. 

They reached the factory of the Twentieth Century Motor Com- 
pany two miles and two hours later. They knew, as they climbed the 
hill, that their quest was useless. A rusted padlock hung on the door 
of the main entrance, hut the huge windows were shattered and the 
place was open to anyone, to the woodchucks, the rabbits and the 
dried leaves that lay in drifts inside 

The factory had been gutted long ago. The great pieces of machin- 
ery' had been moved out by some civilized means — the neat holes of 
their bases still remained in the concrete of the flooi. J he rest had 
gone to random looters. There was nothing left, except refuse which 
the neediest tramp had found worthless, piles of twisted, rusted 
scraps, of boards, plaster and glass splinters — and the steel stairways, 
built to last and lasting, rising in trim spiials to the roof. 

They stopped in the great hall where a ray of light fell diagonally 
from a gap in the ceiling, and the echoes of their steps rang around 
them, dying far away in rows of empty rooms. A bird darted from 
among the steel rafters and went in a hissing streak of wings out 
into the sky. 

“We’d better look through it. just in case.” said Dagny “You take 
the shops and I’ll take the annexes. Let’s do it as fast as possible.” 

“i don’t like to let you wander around alone. I don’t know how- 
safe they are, any of those floors or stairways.” 

“Oh, nonsense! 1 can find my way around a factory — or tn a wreck- 
ing crew. Let’s get it over with. I want to get out of here.”' 

When she walked through the silent yards—where steel, bridges 
still hung overhead, tracing lines of geometrical perfection across the 
sky — her only wish was not to see any of u, but she force a herself 
to look. It was like having to perform an autopsy on the ?txxly of 
one’s love. She moved her glance as an automatic searchlight, her 
teeth damped tight together. She walked rapidly -there was no ne- 
cessity to pause anywhere. 


2m 



It was in a room of what had been the laboratory that she slopped. 
It was a coil of wire that made her stop. The coil protruded from a 
pile of junk. She had never seen that particular arrangement of wires, 
yet it seemed familiar, as if it touched the hint of some memory, 
faint and very distant. She reached for the coil, but could not move 
it: it seemed to be part of some object buried in the pile. 

The room looked as if it had been an experimental laboratory — 
if she was right in judging the purpose of the torn remnants she saw 
on the walls: a great many electrical outlets, bits of heavy cable, lead 
conduits, glass tubing, built-in cabinets without shelves or doors. 
There was a great deal of glass, rubber, plastic and metal in the junk 
pile, and dark gray splinters of slate that had been a blackboard. 
Scraps ot paper rustled dryly all over the floor. There were also 
remnants of things which had not been brought here by the owner 
of that room: popcorn wrappers, a whiskey bottle, a confession 
magazine. 

She attempted to extricate the coil from the scrap pile. It would 
not move; it was part of some large object. She knelt and began to 
dig through the junk. 

She had cut her hands, she was covered with dust by the time she 
stood up to look at the object she had cleared. It was the broken 
remnant of the model of a motor. Most of its parts were missing, 
but enough was left to convey some idea of its former shape and 
purpose. 

She had never seen a motor of this kind or anything resembling 
it. She could not understand the peculiar design of its parts or the 
functions they were intended to perform. 

She examined the tarnished tubes and odd-shaped connections. 
She tried to guess their purpose, her mind going over every type of 
motor she knew and every possible kind of work its parts could 
perform None fitted the model. It looked like an electric motor, but 
she could not tell what fuel it was intended to burn. It was not 
designed for steam, ot oil, or anything she could name. 

Her sudden gasp was not a sound, but a jolt that threw her at the 
junk pile. She was on her hands and knees, crawling over the wreck- 
age, seizing every piece of paper in sight, flinging it away, searching 
further. Her hands were shaking. 

She found part of what she hoped had remained in existence. It 
was a thin sheaf of typewritten pages clamped together — the remnant 
of a manuscript. Its beginning and end were gone; the bits of paper 
left under the clamp showed the thick number of pages it had once 
contained. The paper was yellowed and dry. The manuscript had 
been a description of the motor. 

From the empty enclosure of the plant’s powerhouse, Rcarden 
heard her voice screaming, “HankP It sounded like a scream of 
(error. 

He ran in the direction of the voice. He found her standing in the 
middle of a room, her hands bleeding, her stockings tom, her suit 
smeared with dust, a bunch of papers clutched in her hand. 

“Hank, what does this look like?” she asked, pointing at an odd 
piece of wreckage at her feet; her voice had the intense, obsessed 

269 



lone of a person stunned by a shock, cut off from reality. “What 
does it look like?*' 

“Are you hurt? What happened?” 

“No! . . . Oh, never mind, don't look at me! I’m all right. Look 
at this. Do you know what that is?” 

“What did you do to yourself?” 

“I had to dig it out of there. I’m all right.” 

“You’re shaking.” 

“You will, too, in a moment. Hank! Look at it. Just look and tell 
me what you think it is,” 

He glanced down, then looked attentively— then he was sitting on 
the floor, studying the object intently. “It’s a queer way to put a 
motor together.” he said, frowning. 

“Read this,” she said, extending the pages. 

He read, looked up and said, “Good God!” 

She was sitting on the lloor beside him, and for a moment they 
could say nothing else. 

it was the coil,” she said. She felt as if her mind were racing, 
she could not keep up with all the things which a sudden blast had 
opened to her vision, and her words came hurtling against one an- 
other, “It was the coil that 1 noticed first — because 1 had seen draw- 
ings like it, not quite, hut something like it, yeais ago. when 1 was 
in school— it was in an old book, it was given up as impossible long, 
long ago — but I liked to read everything 1 could find about railroad 
motors. That book said that there was a time when men were think- 
ing of it — they worked on il. they spent years on experiments, but 
they couldn't solve it and they gave it up. It was forgotten for genera- 
tions, 1 didn't, think that any living scientist ever thought of it now. 
But someone did. Someone has solved it, now, today! . . Hank, do 
you understand? Those men, long ago, tried to invent a motor that 
would draw static electricity from the atmosphere, convert it and 
create its own power as it went along. They couldn’t do it. They 
gave it up ” She pointed at the broken shape. “But there it is." 

He nodded He was not smiling. He vat looking at the remnant, 
intent on some thought of his own; it did not seem to be a happy 
thought. 

“Hank 1 Don’t you understand what this means? It’s the greatest 
revolution in power motors since the internal-combustion engine- 
greater than that! It wipes everything out- and makes everything 
possible. To hell with Dwight Sanders and all of them! Who'll want 
to look at a Diesel? Who’ll want to worry about oil. coal or refueling 
stations? Do you sec what I see? A brand-new locomotive half the 
size of a single Diesel unit, and with ten times the pouter A self 
generator, working on a few drops ot fuel, with no limit* to its en- 
ergy. The cleanest, swiftest, cheapest means of motion evbr devised. 
Do you see what this will do to our transportation systems and to 
the country — m about one year?” 

There was no spark of excitement in his (ace. He slowly. 
“Who designed it? Why was it left here?” 

“We’ll find out.” 

He weighed the pages in his hand reflectively. “Dagny/* he asked, 

270 



“if you don’t find the man who made it* will you be able to recon- 
struct that motor from what is left?” 

She took a long moment, then the word fell with a sinking 
sound: “No.” 

“Nobody will. He had it all right* It worked —judging by what he 
writes here. It is the greatest thing Pve ever laid eyes on. It was. We 
can’t make it work again. To supply what’s missing would take a 
mind as great as his.” 

“I’ll find him — if I have to drop every other thing I’m doing.” 

“ — and if he’s still alive.” 

She heard the unstated guess in the tone of his voice. “Why do 
you say it like that?” 

“1 don't think he is. If he were, would he leave an invention of 
this kind to rot on a junk pile? Would he abandon an achievement 
of this si/e? If he were soil alive, you would have had the locomo- 
tives with the self -generators years ago. And you wouldn’t have had 
to look for him, because the whole world would know his name 
by now.” 

“I don't think this model was made so very long ago.” 

Ho looked at the paper of the manuscript and at the rust) tarnish 
of the motor. “About ten years ago. I'd guess. Maybe a little longer.” 

“We've got to find him or somebody who knew him. This is more 
important—” 

“—than anything owned or manufactured by anyone today. I don’t 
think we ll find him. And if we don’t, nobody will be able to repeat 
his performance. Nobody will rebuild his motor. There's not enough 
of it left. It’s only a lead, an invaluable lead, but it would take the 
suit of mind that’s born once in a century, to complete it. Do you 
see our present-day motor designers attempting it?” 

“No.” 

Theie’s not a first-rate designer left. There hasn't been a new 
idea in motors for years. That’s one profession that seems to be 
dying— or dead.” 

“Hank, do you know what that motor would have meant, if built?” 

He chuckled briefly. “Td say: about ten years added to the life of 
every person in this country- -if you consider how many things it 
would have made easier and cheaper to produce, how many hours 
of human labor it would have released for other work, and how 
much more anyone’s work would have brought him. Locomotives? 
What about automobiles and ships and airplanes with a motor of 
this kind? And tractors. And power plants* All hooked to an unlim- 
ited supply of energy, with no fuel to pay for, except a few pennies’ 
woith to keep the converter going. ITiat motor could have set the 
whole country in motion and on fire. It would have brought an elec- 
tric light bulb into every home, even into the homes of those people 
we saw down in the valley,” 

“It would have? It will. I’m going to find the man who made it.” 

“We’ll try.” 

He rose abruptly, but stopped to glance down at the broken rem- 
nant and said, with a chuckle that was not gay, “There was the motor 
lor the John Galt Line.” 


271 



Then he spoke in the brusque manner of an executive. ‘"First, well 
try to see if we can find their personnel office hero. We’ll look for 
their records, if there’s any left. We want the names of their research 
staff and their engineers. I don’t know who owns this place now, 
and I suspect that the owners will be hard to find, or they wouldn’t 
have let it come to this. Then we’ll go over every room in the labora- 
tory, Later, we’H get a few engineers to fly here and comb (he rest 
of the place.” 

They started out, but she stopped for a moment on the threshold. 
“Hank, that motor was the most valuable thing inside this factory,” 
she said, her voice low. “It was more valuable than the whole factory 
and everything it ever contained. Yet it was passed up and left in 
the refuse. It was the one thing nobody found worth the trouble 
of taking.” 

‘That’s what frightens me about this,” he answered. 

The personnel office did not take them long. They found it by the 
sign which was left on the door, but it was the only thing left. There 
was no furniture inside, no papers, nothing but the splinters of 
smashed windows. 

They went back to the room of the motor. Crawling on hands and 
knees, they examined every scrap of the junk that littered the floor. 
There was little to find. They put aside the papers that seemed to 
contain laboratory notes, but none referred to the motor, and there 
were no pages of the manuscript among them. The popcorn wrappers 
and the whiskey bottle testified to the kind of invading hordes that 
had rolled through the room, like waves washing the remnants of 
destruction away to unknown bottoms. 

They put aside a few bits of metal that could have belonged to 
the motor, but these were too small to be of value. The motor looked 
as if parts of it had been ripped off, perhaps by someone who 
thought he could put them to some customary use. What had re- 
mained was too unfamiliar to interest anybody. 

On aching knees, her palms spread flat upon the gritty floor, she 
felt the anger trembling within her, the hurting, helpless anger that 
answers the sight of desecration. She wondered whether someone’s 
diapers hung on a clothesline made ol the motor’s missing wires — 
whether its wheels had become a rope pulley over a communal 
well— whether its cylinder was now a pot containing geraniums on 
the window sill of the sweetheart of the man with the whiskey bottle. 

There was a remnant of light on the hill, but a blue haze was 
moving in upon the valleys, and the red and gold of the leaves was 
spreading to the sky in strips of sunset. 

It was dark when they finished. She rose and leaned against the 
empty frame of the window for a touch of cool air on her forehead. 
The sky was dark blue. “It could have set the whole country )n motion 
and on fire.” She looked down at the motor. She looked Out at the 
country. She moaned suddenly, hit by a single long shudder, and 
dropped her head on her arm, standing pressed to the fratne of the 
window. 

“What’s the matter?” he asked. 

She did not answer. 


272 



He looked out. Far below, in the valley, in the gathering night, there 
trembled a few pale smears which were the lights of tallow candles. 


Chapter X WYATT'S TORCH 

“God have mercy on us, ma’am!” said the clerk of the Halt of Re- 
cords. "Nobody knows who owns that factory now. 1 guess nobody 
will ever know it.” 

The clerk sat at a desk in a ground-floor office, where dust lay 
undisturbed on the files and few visitors ever called. He looked at the 
shining automobile parked outside his window, in the muddy square 
that had once been the center of a prosperous county seat: he looked 
with a faint, wistful wonder at his two unknown visitors. 

"Why?” asked Dagny. 

He pointed helplessly at the mass of papers he had taken out of 
the hies. ‘The court will have to decide who owns it, which 1 don’t 
think any court can do. If a court ever gets to it. I don’t think it will” 

"Why? What happened?” 

"Well, it was sold out- -the Twentieth Century, I mean. 'Hie Twenti- 
eth Century Motor Company. It was sold twice, at the same time and 
to two different sets of owners That was sort of a big scandal at the 
lime two years ago, and now it’s just”- - he pointed — "just a bunch 
of paper lying around, waiting for a court hearing, I don’t see how 
any judge will be able to untangle any property rights out of it— or 
any right at all.” 

"Would you tell me please just what happened'^” 

"Well, the last legal owner of the factory was The People's Mort- 
gage Company, of Rome, Wisconsin. That’s the town the other side 
of the factory, thirty miles north. That Mortgage Company was a sort 
of noisy outfit that did a lot of advertising about easy credit Mark 
Yonts was the head of it. Nobody knew where he came from and 
nobody knows where he’s gone to now. but what they discovered, the 
morning after The People’s Mortgage Company collapsed, was that 
Mark Yonts had sold the Twentieth Century Motor factory to a bunch 
of suckers Irom South Dakota, and that he'd also given it as collateral 
for a loan from a bank in Illinois. And when they took a look at the 
factory, they discovered that he'd moved all the machinery' out and 
sold it piece-meal, God only knows where and to whom. So it seems 
like everybody owns the place— and nobody. That’s how it stands 
now — the South Dakotans and the bank and the attorney for the 
creditors of Ihe People's Mortgage Company all suing one another, 
all claiming this factory, and nobody having the right to move a wheel 
in it, except that there’s no wheels left to move.” 

"Did Mark Yonts operate the factory before he sold it?” 

"Lord, no, ma'am! He wasn’t the kind that ever operates anything. 
He didn’t want to make money, only to get it. Guess he got it, too — 
more than anyone could have made out of that factory.” 

He wondered why the blond, hard-faced man, who sat with the 
woman in front of his desk, looked grimly out the window at their 

273 



car, at a large object wrapped in canvas, roped tightly under the raised 
cover of the car's luggage compartment. 

“What happened to the factory records?” 

“Which do you mean, ma'am?” 

“Their production records. Their work records. Their . . . person- 
nel files.” 

“Oh, there's nothing left of that now. There’s been a lot of Uniting 
going on. All the mixed owners grabbed what furniture or things they 
could haul out of there, even if the sheriff did put a padlock on the 
door. The papers and stuff like that — I guess it was all taken by the 
scavengers from Starncsville, that’s the place down in the valley, where 
they're having it patty tough these days. They burned the stuff for 
kindling, most likely.” 

“Is there anyone left here who used to work in the factory?” 
asked Rearden. 

“No, sir. Not around here. They all lived down in Starnesville.” 

“All of them?” whispered Dagny; she was thinking ot the ruins 
“The . . . engineers, too?” 

“Yes, ma’am. That was the factory town. They’ve all gone, long 
ago.” 

“Do you happen to remember the names of any men who 
worked there?” 

“No, ma’am.” 

“What owner was the last to operate the factory?” asked Rearden. 

“I couldn’t say. sir. There’s been so much trouble up theie and the 
place has changed hands so many times, since old Jed Starnes died 
He’s the man who built the factory'. He made thi^ whole part of the 
country, I guess. He died twelve years ago.” 

“Can you give us the names of all the owneis since?” 

“No. sir. We had a fire in the old courthouse, about three years 
ago, and all the old records are gone 1 don’t know where you could 
trace them now ” 

“You don't know how this Mark Yonls happened to acquire the 
factory?” 

“Yes, I know that. He bought it from Mayor Bascom ol Rome. 
How Mayor Bascom happened to own it. 1 don't know.” 

“Where is Mayor Bascom now 9 ” 

“Soil there, in Rome ” 

“Thank you very' much,” said Rearden. rising. “We’ll call on him ” 

They were at the door when the clerk asked. “What is it you’re 
looking for, sir?” 

“We’re looking for a friend of ours,” said Rearden. “A friend we’ve 
lost, who used to work in that factory.” 

* * 

Mayor Bascom of Rome. Wisconsin, leaned back in his chair; his 
chest and stomach formed a pear-shaped outline under his soited shirt. 
The air was a mixture of sun and dust, pressing heavily ujwn the 
porch of his house. He waved his arm, the ring on his finger? flashing 
a large topaz of poor quality. 

“No use, no use, lady, absolutely no use ” he said. “Woul4 be just 
a waste of your time, trying to question the folks around here. There's 

274 



no factory people left, and nobody that would remember much about 
them. wSo many families have moved away that what’s left here is plain 
no good, if l do say so myself, plain no goodt just being Mayor of a 
bunch of trash.” 

He had offered chairs to his two visitors, but he did not mind it if 
the lady preferred to stand at the porch railing. He leaned back, study- 
ing her long-lined figure; high-class merchandise, he thought; but then, 
the man with her was obviously rich. 

Dagny stood looking at the streets of Rome. There were houses, 
sidewalks, lampposts, even a sign advertising soft drinks; but they 
looked as if it were now only a matter of inches and hours before the 
town would reach the stage of Slarnesville. 

“Naw. there’s no factory records left.*’ said Mayor Bascom. “If 
that's what you want to find, lady, give it up. It’s like chasing leaves 
in a storm now. Just like leaves in a storm. Who cares about papers? 
At a time like this, what people save is good, solid, material objects. 
One's got to be practical.” 

Through the dusty windowpanes, they could see the living room of 
his house: there were Persian rugs on a buckled wooden fioor, a porta- 
ble bar with chomium stops against a wall slamed by the seepage of 
last year s rains, an expensive radio with an old kerosene lamp placed 
on lop of it. 

“Sure, it's me that sold the factory lo Mark Yonls. Mark was a nice 
fellow, a nice, lively, energetic icllow Sure, he did trim a few corners, 
but who doesn't? Of course, he went a bn too tar That, f didn't expect. 

1 thought he was smart enough to stay within the law— whatever's left 
of it nowadays.” 

Mayor Bascom smiled, looking at them m a manner ol placid frank- 
ness His eyes were shrewd without intelligence, his smile good- 
natured without kindness. 

“I don't think you folks are detectives.” he said, “but even if you 
were, it wouldn't matter to me. 1 didn't get any rake-off from Mark, 
he didn't let me in on any of his deals, 1 haven't any idea where he's 
gone to now ” He sighed. ‘1 liked that fellow. Wish he’d stayed 
around Never mind the Sunday sermons. He had to live, didn't he? 
He was no woise than anybody, only smarter. Some get caught at it 
and some don't- -that’s the only difference. . . Nope. 1 didn't know 
what he was going to do with it. when he bought that factory. Sure, 
lie paid me quite a bit more than the old booby trap was worth. Sure, 
lie was doing me a favor when he bought it. Nope, I didn't put any 
pressure on him to make him buy it Wasn't necessary. I'd done him 
a few favors before. There’s plenty of laws that's sort of made of 
rubber, and a mayor's in a position to stretch them a bit for a friend. 
Well, what the hell? 1 hat's the only way anybody ever gets rich in 
this world”-- -he glanced at the luxurious black car — “as you ought 
to know.” 

"You were telling us about the factory.” said Rear den, trying to 
control himself. 

“What 1 can't stand,” said Mayor Bascom, “is people who talk 
about principles. No principle ever filled anybody's milk bottle. The 
only thing that counts in life is solid, material assets. It's no time for 

275 



theories, when everything is falling to pieces around us. Well, me — l 
don't aim to go under. Let them keep their ideas and I’ll take the 
factory. I don’t want ideas, I just want my three square meals a day.” 

“Why did you buy that factory?” 

“Why does anybody buy any business? To squeeze whatever can 
be squeezed out of it 1 know a good chance when l see it. It was a 
bankruptcy sale and nobody much who’d want to bid on the old mess. 
So I got the place for peanuts. Didn’t have to hold it long, either — 
Mark took it off my hands in two-three months. Sure, it was a smart 
deal, if I say so myself. No big business tycoon could have done any 
better with it.” 

'Was the factory operating when you took it over?” 

"Naw. It was shut down.” 

“Did you attempt to reopen it?” 

"Not me. I’m a practical person.” 

"Can you recall the names of any men who worked there?” 

"No. Never met ’em.” 

“Did you move anything out of the factor)' 7 ” 

"Well. HI tell you. I took a look around— and what I liked was old 
Jed’s desk. Old Jed Starnes He was a real big shot in his time. Won- 
derful desk, solid mahogany. So 1 carted it home. And some executive, 
don’t know who he was. had a stall shower in his bathroom, the like 
of which I never saw, A glass door with a mermaid cut m the glass, 
real art work, and hot stuff, too, hotter than any oil painting. So 1 
had that shower lifted and moved here. What the hell, I owned it. 
didn't I? I was entitled to get something valuable out of that factory.” 

"Whose bankruptcy sale was it, when you bought the factory?” 

"Oh, that was the big clash of the Community National Hank in 
Madison. Boy, was that a crash! It just about finished the whole state 
of Wisconsin —sure finished this part of it. Some say it was this motor 
factory that broke the bank, but others say it was only the last drop 
in a leaking bucket, because the Community National had bum invest- 
ments all over three or four states. Eugene Lawson was the head of 
it. The banker with a heart, they called him. He was quite famous in 
these parts two-three years ago.” 

“Did Lawson operate the factory > ” 

“No. He merely lent an awful lot of money on it, more than he 
could ever hope to get back out of the old dump. When the factory 
busted, that was the last straw for Gene Lawson. The bank busted 
three months later.” He sighed. "It hit the folks pretty hard around 
here. They all had their life savings in the Community National.” 

Mayor Bascom looked regretfully past his porch ratling at his town. 
He jerked his thumb at a figure across the street: it was a white-hatred 
charwoman, moving painfully on her knees, scrubbing the steps of 
a house, 

"See that woman, for instance? They used to be solid, respectable 
folks. Her husband owned the dry-goods store. He worked jail his life 
to provide for her in her old age, and he did, too, by thjc time he 
died — only the money was m the Community National Ba(tk.” 

“Who operated the factory when it failed?” 

“Oh, that was some quicky corporation called Amalgamated Ser- 

276 



vice. Inc. Just a puff-ball. Came up out of nothing and went back 
to it.” 

“Where are its members?” 

“Where are the pieces of a puff-ball when it bursts? Try and trace 
them all over the United States. Try it.” 

“Where is Eugene Lawson?” 

“Oh. him? He’s done all right. He’s got a job in Washington — in 
the Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources.” 

Reardcn rose too fast, thrown to his feet by a jolt of anger, then 
said, controlling himself, “Thank you for the information. 11 

“You’re welcome, friend, you’re welcome,” said Mayor Bascom 
placidly. “1 don’t know what it is you’re after, but take my word for 
it, give it up. There’s nothing more to be had out of that factory.” 

“I told you that we arc looking for a friend of ours.” 

“Well, have it your way. Must be a pretty good Iriend, if you'll go 
to so much trouble to find him, you and the charming lady who is 
not your wife ” 

Dagny saw Reardens face go white, so that even his lips became 
a sculptured feature, indistinguishable against his skin. “Keep your 
dirty — ” he began, but she stepped between them. 

“Why do you think that l am not his wife?” she asked calmly. 

Mayor Bascom Ux>ked astonished by Rearden’s reaction: he had 
made the remark without malice, merely like a fellow cheat displaying 
his shrewdness to his partners in guilt. 

“Lady. I’ve seen a lot in my lifetime.” he said good-naturedly. 
“Married people don't look as if they have a bedroom on their minds 
when they look at each other In this world, either you're virtuous or 
you enjoy yourself. Not both, lady, not both.” 

“I’ve asked him a question.” she said to Rcarden in time to silence 
him. “He's given me an instructive explanation.” 

“If you want a tip, lady,” said Mayor Bascom. “get yourself a wed- 
ding ring from the dime store and wear it. It's not sure lire, but 
it helps.” 

' Thank you,” she said. “Good-bye ” 

The stern, stressed calm of her manner was a command that made 
Reardon follow her back to their car in silence. 

They were miles beyond tin* town when he said, not looking at her, 
his voice desperate and low. “Dagny, Dagny, Dagny . . . Lm sorry!” 

‘Tm not.” 

Moments later, when she saw the look of control returning U> his 
face, she said, “Don’t ever get angry at a man for stating the truth.” 

“Thai particular truth was none of his business.” 

“His particular estimate of it was none of your concern or mine.” 

He said through his teeth not as an answer, but as if the single 
thought battering his brain turned into sounds against his will, “I 
couldn’t protect you from that unspeakable little — “ 

“I didn’t need protection.’* 

He remained silent, not looking at her 

“Hank, when you’re able to keep down the anger, tomorrow or 
next week, give some thought to that man’s explanation and see if 
you recognize any part of it/’ 


277 



He jerked his head to glance at her, hut said nothing. 

When he spoke, a long time later, it was only to say in a tired, 
even voice, “We can’t call New York and have our engineers come 
here to search the factory. We can't meet them here. We can’t let it 
be known that we found the motor together. ... 1 had forgotten all 
that ... up there ... in the laboratory.” 

“Let me call Eddie, when we find a telephone. I’ll have him send 
two engineers from the Taggart staff. Em here alone, on my vacation, 
for all they’ll know or have to know.” 

They drove two hundred miles before they found a long-distance 
telephone line. When she called Eddie Willers, he gasped, hearing 
her voice. 

“Dagny! For God’s sake, where arc you?” 

“In Wisconsin. Why?” 

“1 didn’t know where to reach you. You’d better come back at 
once. As fast as you can.” 

“What happened?” 

“Nothing vet. But there arc things going on, which . . . You’d better 
stop them now, if you can If anybody can.” 

“What things 7 ” 

“Haven’t you been reading the newspapers'*” 

“No.” 

“I can t tell you over the phone. I can’t give you all the details. 
Dagny, you'll think I'm insane, but I think they're planning to kill 
Colorado.” 

‘Til come back at once,” she said. 

* V 

Cut into the granite ot Manhattan, under the Taggart Terminal, 
there were tunnels which had once been used as sidings, at a time 
when traftic ran in clicking currents through every artery of the Termi- 
nal every hour of the day. ITie need for space had shrunk through 
the years, with the shrinking ol the t rathe, and the side tunnels had 
been abandoned, like dry river beds: a few lights remained as blue 
patches on the granite over rails left to rust on the ground. 

Dagny placed the remnant of the motor into a vault in one ot the 
tunnels, the vault had once contained an emergency electric generator, 
which had been removed long ago. She did not trust the useless young 
men of the Taggart research staff; there were only two engineers of 
talent among them who could appreciate her discovery. She had 
shared her secret with the two and sent them to search the lactory in 
Wisconsin. Then she had hidden the motor where no one else would 
know of its existence. 

When her workers carried the motor down to the vault and de- 
parted. she was about to follow them and lock the steel dix*r, but she 
stopped, key in hand, as if the silence and solitude had suddenly 
thrown Iict at the problem she had been facing lor days, as if this 
were the moment to make her decision. 

Her office car was waiting for her at one of the Terminal platforms, 
attached to the end of a train due to leave for Washington in a few 
minutes. She had made an appointment to see Eugene l^son, but 
she had told herself that she would cancel it and postpone her quest — 

278 



if she could think of some action to take against the things she had 
found on her return to New York, the things Eddie begged her to 
fight. 

She had tried to think, but she couid see no way of fighting, no 
rules of battle, no weapons. Helplessness was a strange experience, 
new to her; she had never found it hard to face things and make 
decisions; but she was not dealing with things— this was a fog without 
shapes or definitions, m which something kept forming and shifting 
before it could be seen, like semi-clots in a not-quiteTiquid — it was 
as if her eyes were reduced to side-vision and she were sensing blurs 
of disaster coiling toward her, but she could not move her glance, she 
had no glance to move and focus. 

The Union of Locomotive Engineers was demanding that the maxi- 
mum speed of all trains on the John Galt Line be reduced to sixty 
miles an hour. The Union of Railway Conductors and Brakemen was 
demanding that the length of all freight trains on the John Galt Line 
be reduced to sixty cars. 

The states of Wyoming, New Mexico, Utah and Arizona were de- 
manding that the number of trains run m Colorado not exceed the 
number of trains run in each of these neighboring states. 

A group headed by Orren Boyle was demanding the passage of a 
Preservation of Livelihood Law, which would limit the production of 
Reardon Metal to an amount equal to the output of any other steel 
mill of equal plant capacity. 

A group headed by Mr. Mowen was demanding the passage of a 
Pair Share Law to give every customer who wanted it an equal supply 
of Reardon Metal. 

A group headed bv Bertram Scudder was demanding the passage 
of a iHiblic Stability Law, forbidding Eastern business firms to move 
out of their states. 

Wesley Mouch. Top Co-ordinator of the Bureau of Economic Plan- 
ning and National Resources, was issuing a great many statements, 
the content and purpose of which could not he defined, except that 
I he words "emergency powers 1 ' and "unbalanced economy" kept ap- 
pearing m the text every tew lines 

"Dagny, by what right?" Eddie Willem had asked her, his voice 
quiet, but the words sounding like a cry "By what right are they all 
doing it? By what right?" 

She had confronted James Taggart in his office and said, "Jim, this 
is your battle. I've fought mine. You're supposed to he an expert at 
dealing with the looters Stop them.” 

Taggart had said, not looking at her, "You can’t expect to run the 
national economy to suit your own convenience ” 

"l don't want to run the national economy! I want your national 
economy runners to leave me alone! 1 have a railroad to run — and 1 
know what's going to happen to your national economy if my rail- 
road collapses!” 

“1 sec no necessity for panic? 1 

"Jim, do I have to explain to you that the income from our Rio 
Nortd Line is all we've got, to save us from collapsing? That we need 
every penny of it, every fare, every carload of freight as fast as we 

279 



can get it?" He had not answered. “When we have to use every bit 
of power in every one of our broken-down Diesels, when we don’t 
have enough of them to give Colorado the service it needs— whafs 
going to happen if we reduce the speed and the length of trains?" 

"Well, there's something to be said for the unions’ viewpoint, too. 
With so many railroads dosing and so many railroad men out of work, 
they feel that those extra speeds you've established on the Rio Norte 
Line are unfair— they feel that there should be more trams, instead, 
so that the work would be divided around— they feel that it's not fair 
for us to get all the benefit of that new rail, they want a share of 
it. too." 

"Who wants a share of it? In payment for what?" He had not 
answered. "Who'll bear the cost of two trains doing the work of one?" 
He had not answered. “Where are you going to get the cars and the 
engines?" He had not answered. "What are those men going to do 
after they’ve put Taggart Transcontinental out of existence 0 " 

"I fully intend to protect the interests of Taggart Transcontinental." 

"How?" He had not answered. “How — it you kill C olorado?" 

“It seems to me that before we worry about giving some people a 
chance to expand, we ought to give some consideration to the people 
who need a chance of bare survival." 

"If you kill Colorado, what is there going to be left for your damn 
looters to survive on?" 

“You have always been opposed to every progressive social mea- 
sure. I seem to remember that you predicted disaster when we passed 
the Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule -but the disaster has not come." 

"Because / saved you, you rotten fools! 1 won’t be able to save you 
this time!" He had shrugged, not looking at her. "And if 1 don't, who 
will?" He had not answered. 

It did not seem real to her. here, under the ground. Thinking of it 
here, she knew she could have no part in Jim's battle. There was no 
action she could take against the men of undefined thought, of un- 
named motives, of unstated purposes, of unspecified morality. There 
was nothing she could say to them — nothing would be heard or am 
swered. What were the weapons, she thought, in a realm where reason 
was not a weapon any longer? It was a realm she could not enter 
She had to leave it to Jim and count on his self-interest. Dimly, she fell 
the chill of a thought telling her that self-interest was not Jim's motive. 

She looked at the object before her, a glass case containing the 
remnant of the motor The man who made the motor -she thought 
suddenly, the thought coming bke a cry of despair. She felt a moment s 
helpless longing to find him. to lean against him ami let him tell hei 
what to do, A mind like his would know the way to win this battle. 

She looked around her. In the clean, rational world of |he under- 
ground tunnels, nothing was of so urgent an importance the task 
of finding the man who made the motor. She thought; CoultJ she delay 
it in order to argue with Orren Boyle? — to reason with Mr. Mowen?— 
to plead with Bertram Scudder? She saw the motor, completed, built 
into an engine that pulled a train of two hundred cars do*m a track 
of Rearden Metal at tw o hundred miles an hour. When - the vision 
was within her reach, within the possible, was she to give it up and 

280 



spend her time bargaining about sixty mites and sixty cars? She could 
not descend to an existence where her brain would explode under the 
pressure of forcing itself not to outdistance incompetence. She could 
not function to the rule of: Pipe down — keep down — slow down — 
don’t do your best, it is not wanted! 

She turned resolutely and lett the vault, to take the tram for 
Washington. 

It seemed to her, as she locked the steel door, that she heard a 
faint echo of steps. She glanced up and down the dark curve of the 
tunnel. There was no one in sight; there was nothing but a siring of 
blue lights glistening on walls ot damp granite. 

Rcarden aiuld not fight the gangs who demanded the laws. The 
choice was to tight them or to keep his mills open. He had lost his 
supply of iron ore. He had to fight one battle or the other. There was 
no time for both. 

He had found, on his return, that a scheduled shipment of ore had 
not been delivered. No word or explanation had been heard from 
Larkin. When summoned to Rearden’s office, Larkin appeared three 
days later than the appointment made, offering no apology. Lie said, 
not looking at Reardcn, his mouth drawn tightly into an expression 
of rancorous dignity: 

“After all, you can’t order people to come running to your office 
any tune you please ” 

Rearden spoke slowly and carefully. “Why wasn't the oie delivered?” 

“I won't take abuse, I simply won’t take any abuse for something 
I couldn't help. I can run a mine just as well as you ran it. every bit 
as well. 1 did everything you did — 1 don't know why something keeps 
going wrong unexpectedly all the time. I can't be blamed for the 
unexpected.” 

“ I o whom did you ship your ore last month?” 

“1 intended to ship you your share of it, I fully intended it, but l 
couldn’t help it if we lost ten days of production last month on account 
of the rainstorm in the whole of north Minnesota — I intended to ship 
you the ore, so you can’t blame me, because my intention was com- 
pletely honest.” 

“If one of my blast furnaces goes down, will 1 be able to keep it 
going by feeding your intention into a 4> " 

“That's why nobody can deal with you or talk to you — because 
you're inhuman.” 

“1 have just learned that for the last three months, you have not 
been shipping your ore by the lake boats, you have been shipping it 
by tail. Why?” 

“Well, after all, I have a right to run my business as l see fit.” 

“Why are you willing to pay the extra cost?” 

“What do you care? I'm not charging it to you.” 

“What will you do when you find that you can't afford the rail rates 
and that you have destroyed the lake shipping?” 

“I am sure you wouldn't understand any consideration other than 
dollars and cents, but some people do consider their social and patri- 
otic responsibilities.” 


281 



“What responsibilities?” 

“Welt, l think that a railroad like Taggart Transcontinental is essen- 
tial to the national welfare and it is one’s public duty to support Jim’s 
Minnesota branch tine, which is running at a deficit.” 

Rearden leaned forward across the desk; he was beginning to see 
the links of a sequence he had never understood. “To whom did you 
ship your ore last month**” he asked evenly. 

“Well, after all, that is my private business which—” 

“To Orren Boyle, wasn't it?” 

“You can't expect people to sacrifice the entire steel industry of 
the nation to your selfish interests and — ” 

“Get out of here.” said Rearden. He said it calmly. The sequence 
was clear to him now. 

“Don’t misunderstand me, l didn’t mean—” 

“Get out.” 

Larkin got out. 

Then there followed the days and nights of searching a continent 
by phone, by wire, by plane — of looking at abandoned mines and at 
mines ready to be abandoned — of tense, rushed conferences held at 
tables in the unlighted comers of disreputable restaurants. Looking 
across the table. Rearden had to decide how much he could risk to 
invest upon the sole evidence of a man’s face, manner and tone of 
voice, hating the state of having to hope for honesty as for a favor, 
but risking it, pouring money into unknown hands in exchange for 
unsupported promises, into unsigned, unrecorded loans to dumm> 
owners of failing mines— money handed and taken furtively, as an 
exchange between criminals, m anonymous cash, money poured into 
unenforceable contracts— both parties knowing that in ease of fraud, 
the defrauded was to be punished, not the defrauder — but poured 
that a stream of ore might continue flowing into furnaces, that the 
furnaces might continue to pour a stream of white metal. 

“Mr. Rearcjen,” asked the purchasing manager of his mills, “if you 
keep that up, where will be your profit?” 

“Well make it up on tonnage,” said Rearden wearily. “We have 
an unlimited market for Rearden Metal “ 

The purchasing manager was an elderly man with graying hair, a 
lean, dry face, and a heart which, people said, was given exclusively 
to the task ot squeezing every last ounce of value out of a penny. He 
stood in front of Rearden s desk, saying nothing else, merely looking 
straight at Rearden, his cold eyes narrowed and grim, ft was a look 
of the most profound sympathy that Rearden had ever seen. 

There’s no other course open, thought Rearden, as he had thought 
through days and nights. He knew no weapons but to pay for what 
he wanted, to give value for value, to ask nothing of nature without 
trading his effort in return, to ask nothing of men without trading the 
product of his effort. What were the weapons, he thought, {if values 
were not a weapon any longer? 

“An unlimited market, Mr. Rearden?” the purchasing [manager 
asked dryly. 

Rearden glanced up at him. “I guess I’m not smart enough to make 

282 



the sort of deals needed nowadays/’ he said, in answer to the unspo- 
ken thoughts that hung across his desk. 

The purchasing manager shook his head. “No, Mr. Rearden, it’s 
one or the other. The same kind of brain can’t do both. Either you’re 
good at running the mills or you’re good at running to Washington.” 

“Maybe l ought to team their method.” 

“You couldn’t learn it and it wouldn’t do you any good. You 
wouldn’t win in any of those deals. Don’t you understand? You’re 
the one who’s got something to be tooted.” 

When he was left atone, Rearden felt a jolt of blinding anger, as it 
had come to him before, painful, single and sudden tike an electric 
shock— the anger bursting out of the knowledge that one cannot deal 
with pure evil, with the naked, full-conscious evil that neither has nor 
seeks justification. But when he tett the wish to tight and kill in the 
rightful cause of self-defense —he saw the fat, grinning face of Mayor 
Bascom and heard the drawling voice saying, “ . . . you and the 
charming lady who is not your wife.” 

Ihen no rightful cause was left, and the pain of anger was turning 
into the shameful pain of submission. He had no right to condemn 
anyone— he thought -to denounce anything, to light and die joyously, 
claiming the sanction of virtue, t he broken promises, the unconfessed 
desires, the betrayal, the deceit, the lies, the fraud — he was guilty of 
them alt What form of corruption could he scorn? Degrees do not 
matter, he thought; one does not bargain about inches ol evil. 

He did not know- -as he sat slumped at his desk, thinking ot the 
honesty he could claim no longer, of the sense of justice he had lost — 
that it was his rigid honesty and ruthless sense of justice that were 
now knocking his only weapon out of his hands. He would fight the 
looters, but the wrath and the fire were gone. He would fight, but 
only as one guilty wretch against the others. He did not pronounce 
the words, but the pain was their equivalent, the ugly pain saying: 
\Mio am I to east the first stone? 

He let his body fail across the desk. . . Dagny , he thought. Dagny, 
if this is the price I have to pay. I'll pay it. . . He was stilt the trader 
who knew no code except that of full payment for his desires. 

It was late when he came home and hurried m Mindlessly up the 
stairs to his bedroom. He hated himself for being reduced to sneaking, 
but he had done it on most of his evenings for months. 'The sight of 
his family had become unbearable to him: he could not tell why. Don't 
hate them for your own guilt, he had told himself, but knew dimly 
that this was not the root of his hatred. 

He closed the door of his bedioom like a fugitive winning a mo- 
ment’s reprieve. He moved cautiously, undressing for bed: he wanted 
no sound to betray his presence to his family, he wanted no contact 
with them, not even in theit own minds. 

He had put on his pajamas and stopped to light a cigarette, when 
the door of his bedroom opened, the only person who could properly 
enter his room without knocking had never volunteered to enter it, 
so he stared blankly for a moment before he was able to believe that 
it was Lillian who came in. 

She wore an Empire garment of pale chartreuse, its pleated skirt 

2#3 



streaming gracefully from its high waistline; one could not tell at first 
glance whether it was an evening gown or a negligee; it was a negligee. 
She paused in the doorway, the lines of her body flowing into an 
attractive silhouette against the light. 

“I know I shouldn't introduce myself to a stranger," she said softly, 
“but I'll have to: my name is Mrs. Reardon." He could not tell 
whether it was sarcasm or a plea. 

She entered and threw the door closed with a casual, imperious 
gesture, the gesture of an owner. 

“What is it, Lillian?" he asked quietly. 

“My dear, you mustn’t confess so much so bluntly" — she moved in 
a leisurely manner across the room, past his bed, and sat down in an 
armchair — “and so unflatteringly. It’s an admission that I need to show 
special cause for taking your time. Should I make an appointment 
through your secretary?" 

He stood in the middle of the room, holding the cigarette at his 
lips, looking at her, volunteering no answer. 

She laughed. "My reason is so unusual that 1 know it will never 
occur to you; loneliness, darling. Do you mind throwing a few crumbs 
of your expensive attention to a beggar? Do you mind if l stay here 
without any formal reason at all?" 

“No," he said quietly, “not if you wish to." 

“1 have nothing weighty to discuss— no million-dollar orders, no 
transcontinental deals, no rails, no bridges. Not even the political situa- 
tion. 1 just want to chatter like a woman about perfectly unimport- 
ant things." 

“Go ahead.” 

“Henry, there’s no better way to stop me, is there?" She had an air 
of helpless, appealing sincerity. “What can I say after that? Suppose I 
wanted to tell you about the new novel which Ralph Eubank is writ- 
ing— he is dedicating it to me — would that interest you?" 

“If it’s the truth you want —not in the least." 

She laughed, “And if it’s not the truth that I want?" 

“Then 1 wouldn’t know what to say," he answered— and tell a rush 
of blood to his brain, tight as a slap, realizing suddenly the double 
infamy of a lie uttered in protestation of honesty; he had said it sin- 
cerely, but it implied a boast to which he had no right any longer. 
“Why would you want it, if it’s not the truth?" he asked. “What for?" 

“Now you see, that's the cruelty of conscientious people. You 
wouldn’t understand it — would you? — if 1 answered that real devotion 
consists of being willing to lie. cheat and fake in order to make an- 
other person happy — to create for him the reality he wants, il he 
doesn’t like the one that exists." 

“No." he said slowly, “1 wouldn’t understand it." ; 

“It’s really veiy simple. If you tell a beautiful woman th$t she is 
beautiful, what have you given her? It’s no more than a fa^t and it 
has cost you nothing. Rut if you tell an ugly woman that she $ beauti- 
ful, you offer her the great homage of corrupting the concept of 
beauty. To love a woman for her virtues is meaningless. Shei earned 
it. it’s a payment, not a gift. But to love her for her vices Is a real 
gift, unearned and undeserved. To love her for her vices is to defile 

234 



all virtue for her sake— and that is a real tribute of love, because you 
sacrifice your conscience, your reason, your integrity and your invalu- 
able self-esteem.” 

He looked at her blankly. It sounded like some sort of monstrous 
corruption that precluded the possibility of wondering whether anyone 
could mean it; he wondered only what was the point of uttering it 

“What's love, darling, if it’s not self-sacrifice?” she went on lightly, 
in the tone of a drawing-room discussion. “What's self-sacrifice, unless 
one sacrifices that which is one's most precious and most important? 
But I don't expect you to understand it Not a stainless-steel Puritan 
like you. That's the immense selfishness of the Puritan. You'd let the 
whole world perish rather than soil that immaculate self of yours with 
a single spot of which you’d have to be ashamed.” 

He said slowly, his voice oddly strained and solemn, “1 have never 
claimed to be immaculate.” 

She laughed: “And what is it you're being right now? You’re giving 
me an honest answer, aren't you?” She shrugged her naked shoulders, 
“Oh, darling, don’t take me seriously! I'm just talking.” 

He ground his cigarette into an ashtray: he did not answer, 

“Darling.” she said. “I actually came here only because 1 kept think- 
ing that l had a husband and 1 wanted to find out what he looked 
like.” 

She studied him as he stood across the room, the tall, straight, 
taut lines of his body emphasized by the single color of the dark 
blue pajamas. 

“You're very attractive.” she said. “You look so much better — 
these last few months. Younger. Should 1 say happier? You look less 
tense. Oh, I know you’ic rushed more than ever and you act like a 
commander in an air raid, but that's only the surface. You're less 
tense — inside.” 

He looked at her. astonished It was true; he had not known it. had 
not admitted it to himseli. He wondered at her power of observation. 
She had seen little of him, in these last few months. He had not 
entered her bedroom since his return from Colorado. He had thought 
that she would welcome then isolation from each other. Now he won- 
dered what motive could have made her so sensitive to a change in 
him— unless it was a feeling much greater than he had ever suspected 
her of experiencing, 

“1 was not aware of it/* he said. 

“It's quite becoming, dear— and astonishing, since you've been hav- 
ing such a terribly difficult time.” 

He wondered whether this was intended as a question. She paused, 
as if waiting for an answer, but she did not press it and went on gaily: 

“I know you’re having all sorts of trouble at the mills— and then 
the political situation is getting to be ominous, isn't it? If they pass 
those laws they’re talking about, it will hit you pretty hard, won't it?” 

“Yes. It will. But that is a subject which is of no interest to you, 
Lillian, is it?” 

“Oh, but U is!” She raised her head and looked straight at him; her 
eyes had the blank, veiled took he had seen before, a look of deliber- 
ate mystery and of confidence in his inability to solve it. “It is of great 

285 



interest to me . . . though not because of any possible financial losses/’ 
she added softly. 

He wondered, for the first time, whether her spite, her sarcasm, the 
cowardly manner of delivering insults under the protection of a smile, 
were not the opposite of what he had always taken them to be — not 
a method of torture, but a twisted form of despair, not a desire to 
make him suffer, but a confession of her own pain, a defense tor the 
pride of an unloved wife, a secret plea — so that the subtle, the hinted, 
the evasive in her manner, the thing begging to be undersUXKi. was 
not the open malice, but the hidden love. He thought of it, aghast. It 
made hts guilt greater than he had ever contemplated. 

"It we re talking polities, Henry, I had an amusing thought. The 
side you represent — what is that slogan you all use so much, the motto 
you’re supposed to stand for? ’The sanctity of contrail'— is that it?" 

She saw his swift glance, the imentness of his eyes, the fn si response 
of something she had struck, and she laughed aloud. * 

“Go on," he said; his voice was low; it had the sound of a threat. 

’‘Darling, what for?— since you undci stood me quite well." 

"What was it you intended to say?" His voice was harshly pi ease 
and without any color of feeling. 

"Do you really wish to bring me to the humiliation ol complaining'’ 
It's so trite and such a common complaint- -although I did think 1 
had a husband who prides himself on being different from lesser men 
Do you want me to remind you that you once swore to make m> 
happiness the aim of your lile’ > And that you can't reallv say in all 
honesty whether i ni happy or unhappy, because you haven t even 
inquired whether I exist? * 

He fell them as a physical pain -all the things that came tearing at 
him impossibly together Her words were a plea, he thought— and he 
felt the dark, hot (low of guilt, fie felt pity the cold ugliness of pity 
without affection. He felt a dim anger, like a voice he tried to choke, 
a voice crying in revulsion- Why should I deal with her lottcn, twisted 
lying? — why >hould 1 accept torture for the sake of pity? -why is it t 
who should have to take the hopeless but den ol trying to spate a 
feeling she won't admit, a feeling I can't know oi understand or trv 
to guess? — it she loves me. why doesn't the damn coward say so and 
Jet us both face it in the open? He heard another, louder voice, saying 
evenly: Don't switch the blame to her. that’s the oldest trick ol all 
cowards — you're guilty- no matter what she does, it’s nothing com 
pared to your guilt -she's right - it makes you sick, doesn’t it. to know 
it's she who’s right? -let it make you sick, you damn adulterer— it’s 
she who’s right* 

"What would make you happy, Lillian?" he asked His Voice was 
toneless. 

She smiled, leaning back in her chair, relaxing; she had been watch- 
ing his face intently. 

"Oh, dear!" she said, as in bored amusement. "That's t$e shyster 
question. The loophole, I he escape clause." 

She got up, letting her arms fall with a shrug, stretching? her body 
in a limp, graceful gesture of helplessness, 

"What would make me happy, Henry? That is what yoi| ought to 

286 



tell me. That is what you should have discovered for me. I don’t 
know. You were to create it and offer it to me. That was your trust, 
your obligation, your responsibility. But you won’t be the first man 
to default on that promise. It’s the easiest of all debts to repudiate. 
Oh, you’d never welsh on a payment for a load of iron ore delivered 
to you. Only on a life.” 

She was moving casually across the room, the green-yellow folds of 
her skirt coiling in long waves about her. 

“I know t hat claims of this kind are impractical,” she said. ”1 have 
no mortgage on you, no collateral, no guns, no chains. I have no hold 
on you at all, Henry— nothing hut your honor.” 

Fie stood looking at her as if it look all of his effort to keep his 
eyes directed at her face, to keep seeing her, to endure the sight. 
“What do you want?” he asked. 

“Darling, there are so many things you could guess by yourself, if 
you really wished to know what 1 want. For instance, if you have 
been avoiding me so blatantly for months, wouldn’t 1 want to know 
the reason?” 

“I have been very busy.” 

She shrugged. “A wife expects to be the first concern ot her hus- 
band's existence. I didn’t know that when you swore to forsake all 
others, it didn't include blast furnaces.” 

She came closer and, with an amused smile that seemed to mock 
them both, she slipped her arms around him. 

It was the swift, instinctive, ferocious gesture of a young bridegroom 
at the unrequested contact of a whore— the gesture with which he 
lore her arms off his body and threw her aside. 

He stood, paralyzed, shocked by the brutality of his own reaction 
She was staring at him. her face naked in bewilderment, with no 
mystery, no piotense or protection; whatever calculations she had 
made, this was a thing she had not expected. 

Tm sorry, Lillian lie said, his voice low, a voice of sincerity 
and of suffering. 

She did not answer. 

‘Tm sorry . . It’s just that l*m very tired.” he added, his voice 
lifeless; he was broken by the triple lie, one part of which was a 
disloyalty he could not bear to face; it was nol the disloyalty to I illian. 

She gave a brief chuckle “Well, if that’s the effect your work has 
on you. I may come to approve of it. Do forgive me, I was merely 
trying to dom\ duty. I thought that you were a sensualist who Vi never 
rise above the instincts of an animal in the gutter Lm not one of 
those bitches who belong in if ” She was snapping the words dryly, 
absently, without thinking. Her mind was on a question mark, racing 
over every passible answer. 

It was her last sentence that made him face her suddenly, face her 
simply, directly, nol as one on the defensive any longer. “Lillian, what 
purpose do you live for?” he asked. 

“What a crude question! No enlightened person would ever ask it” 

“Well, what is it that enlightened people do with their lives?” 

“Perhaps they do not attempt to do anything. That is their 
enlightenment.” 


287 



"What do they do with Jheir time?” 

‘They certainly don't spend it on manufacturing plumbing pipes.” 

"Tell me, why do you keep making those cracks? I know that you 
feel contempt for the plumbing pipes. You've made that clear long 
ago. Your contempt means nothing to me. Why keep repeating it?” 

He wondered why this hit her; he did not know in what manner, 
but he knew that it did He wondered why he ielt with absolute 
certainty that that had been the right thing to say. 

She asked, her voice dry, "What's the purpose of the sudden 
questionnaire?” 

He answered simply, T\1 like to know whether there's anything 
that you really want, If there is, I'd like to give it to you, it I can *’ 

"You'd like to buy it? That’s all you know paying for things. You 
get off easily, don’t you? No. it’s not as simple as that. What I want 
is non-material.” 

"What is it?” 

"You.” 

"How do you mean that, Lillian 7 You don’t mean it in the gutter 
sense,” 

"No, not in the gutter sense,” 

"How. then?” 

She was at the door, she turned, she raised her head to look at him 
and smiled coldly. 

"You wouldn’t understand it,” she said and walked out. 

The torture remaining to him was the knowledge that she would 
never want to leave him and lie would never have the right to leave— the 
thought that he owed her a* least the feeble recognition of sympathy, 
of respect for a feeling he could neither understand nor return - the 
knowledge that he could summon nothing for her, except contempt, 
a strange, total, unreasoning contempt, impervious to pity, to re- 
proach. to his own pleas for justice — and, hardest to bear, the proud 
revulsion against his own verdict, against his demand that he consider 
himself lower, than this woman he despised. 

Then it did not matter to him any longer, it ail receded into some 
outer distance, leaving only the thought that he was willing to beai 
anything — leaving him in a state which was both tension and peace - 
because he lay in bed, his face pressed to the pillow, thinking of 
Dagny, of her slender, sensitive body stretched beside him, trembling 
under the touch of his fingers. He wished she were back in New York. 
If she were, he would have gone there, now, at once, in the middle 
of the night. 

* * 

Eugene Lawson sat at his desk as if it were the control panel of a 
bomber plane commanding a continent below. But he iorgot it, at 
times, and slouched down, his muscles going slack inside hjs suit, as 
if he were pouting at the world. His mouth was the one pdrt of him 
which he could not pull tight at any time; it was uncomfortably promi- 
nent in his lean face, attracting the eyes ol any listener : } when he 
spoke, the movement ran through his lower lip, twisting its ifcoist flesh 
into extraneous contortions of its own. 

"I am not ashamed of it,” said Eugene Lawson. "Miss Taggart* l 

288 



want you to know that I am not ashamed of my past career as presi- 
dent of the Community National Bank of*Madison/* 

“I haven't made any reference to shame/* said Dagny coldly. 

“No moral guilt can be attached to me. inasmuch as I lost every- 
thing I possessed in the crash of that bank. It seems to me that 1 
would have the right to feel proud of such a sacrifice/* 

“l merely wanted to ask you some questions about the Twentieth 
(Century Motor Company which- -” 

“I shall be glad to answer any questions I have nothing to hide. My 
conscience is clear. If you thought that the subject w r as embarrassing to 
rne, you were mistaken.” 

“I wanted to inquire about the men who owned the factory at the 
time when you made a loan to—” 

“They were perfectly good men. They were a perfectly sound risk — 
though, of course, I am speaking in human terms, not in the terms of 
cold cash, which you are accustomed to expect from bankers. I granted 
them the loan for the purchase of that factory, because they needed 
the money. If people needed money, that was enough for me. Need 
was my standard. Miss Taggart. Need not greed. My father and grand- 
father built up the Community National Bank just to amass a fortune 
for themselves. I placed their fortune in the service of a higher ideal. 
I did not sit on piles of money and demand collateral from poor 
people who needed loans. The heart was my collateral. Of course, I 
do not expect anyone m this materialistic country to understand me. 
The rewards 1 got were not of a kind that people of vour class, Mis.s 
Taggart, would appreciate. The people who used to sit in front of mv 
desk, at the bank, did not sit as you do, Miss Taggart. They were 
humble, uncertain, worn with care, afraid to speak. My rewards were 
the tears of gratitude in their eyes, the trembling voices, the blessings, 
the woman who kissed my hand when l granted her a loan she had 
begged tor in vain everywhere else.” 

“Will you please tell me the names of the men who owned the 
motor factory?*’ 

“That factory was essential to the region, absolutely essential. 1 was 
perfectly justified in granting that loan. It provided employment for 
thousands of workers who had no other means of livelihood/’ 

“Did you know any of the people who worked in the factory?” 
“Certainly. I knew them all. It was men that interested me, not 
machines, I was concerned with the human side of industry, not the 
cash-register side/’ 

She leaned eagerly across the desk. “Did you know any of the 
engineers who worked there?” 

“I’he engineers? No, no. I was much more democratic than that. 
It's the real workers that interested me. The common men. They all 
knew me by sight. I used to come into the shops and they would 
wave and shoqt, ‘Hello, Gene.' Thai’s what they called me — Gene. 
But I’m sure this is of no interest to you. It’s past history. Now if you 
really came to Washington in order to talk to me about your rail- 
road *^ — he straightened up briskly, the bomber-plane pose returning — 
“I don’t know whether 1 can promise you any special consideration, 

289 



inasmuch as I must hold the national welfare above any private privi- 
leges or interests which — ” 

“I didn’t come to talk to you about my railroad,” she said, looking 
at him in bewilderment. "1 have no desire to talk to you about my 
railroad,” 

“No?” He sounded disappointed, 

“No. 1 came for information about the motor factory. Could you 
possibly recall the names of any of the engineers who worked there?” 

“I don’t believe 1 ever inquired about their names. I wasn’t con- 
cerned with the parasites of office and laboratory. I was concerned 
with tire real workers — the men of call used hands who keep a factory 
going. They were my friends.” 

“Can you give me a tew of their names? Any names, ot anyone 
who worked there?” 

“My dear Miss Taggart, it was so long ago. there were thousands 
of them, how can 1 remember?” 

“Can’t you recall one, any one?” 

“I certainly cannot. So many people have always filled my life that 
I can’t be expected to recall individual drops in the ocean.” 

“Were you familiar with the production of that factory? With the 
kind of work they were doing -- or planning?” 

“Certainly. I took a personal interest in all my investments I went 
to inspect that factory very often. They were doing exceedingly well. 
They were accomplishing wonders. The workers' housing conditions 
were the best in the country. I saw lace curtains at every window and 
flowers on the window sills. Every home had a plot of ground for a 
garden. They had built a new schoolhouse for the children.” 

“Did you know anything about the work of the factory’s research 
laboratory?” 

“Yes, yes, they had a wonderful research laboratory, very advanced, 
very dynamic, with forward vision and great plans.” 

“Do you . . . remember hearing anything about . . . any plans to 
produce a new- type of motor?” 

“Motor? What motor. Miss Taggart? 1 had no time for details. My 
objective was social progress, universal prosperity, human brotherhood 
and love. Love, Miss Taggart. That is the key to everything. If men 
learned to love one another, it would solve all their problems.” 

She turned away, not to see the damp movements of his mouth. 

A chunk of stone with Egyptian hieroglyphs lay on a pedestal in a 
corner of the office — the statue of a Hindu goddess with six spider 
arms stood in a niche — and a huge graph of bewildering mathematical 
detail, like the sales chart of a mail-order hoUsSe, hung on the wall. 

“Therefore, if you’re thinking of your railroad. Miss Taggart — as, 
of course, you are, in view of certain possible developmental must 
point out to you that although the welfare of the country is kny first 
consideration, to which l would not hesitate to sacrifice Anyone’s 
profits, still, l have never closed my ears to a plea for mercyjland — ” 

She looked at him and understood what it was that he wanted from 
her, what sort of motive kept him going, 

“I don’t wish to discuss my railroad,” $h** said, fighting to Ifeep her 
voice monotonously flat, while she wanted to scream in revulsion. 

290 



“Anything you have to say on the subject, you will please say it to 
my brother, Mr, James Taggart.” 

‘Td think that at a time like this you wouldn't want to pass up a 
rare opportunity to plead your case before — ” 

“Have you preserved any records pertaining to the motor factory?” 
She sat straight, her hands clasped tight together. 

“What records? I believe I told you that I lost everything I owned 
when the bank collapsed.” His body had gone slack once more, his 
interest had vanished. “But 1 do not mind it What I lost was mere 
material wealth. I am not the first man in history to suffer for an 
ideal. I was defeated by the selfish greed of those around me. I 
couldn't establish a system of brotherhood and love in just one small 
state, amidst a nation of profit-seekers and dollar-grubbers. It was not 
my fault. But I won't let them beat me. I am not to be stopped. I am 
fighting— on a wider scale — lor the privilege of serving my fellow men. 
Records, Miss Taggart? The record I left, when 1 departed from Madi- 
son. is inscribed in the hearts of the poor, who had never had a 
chance before." 

She did not want to utter a single unnecessary word; but she could 
not stop herself: she kept seeing the figure of the old charwoman 
scrubbing the steps. “Have you seen that section of the country 
since?" she asked. 

“It’s not my fault!” he yelled. “It’s the lault of the rich who still 
had money, but wouldn’t sacrifice it to save my bank and the people 
of Wisconsin 1 You can t blame me! 1 lost everything!" 

“Mr. I-awson,” she said with effort, “do you perhaps recall the 
name of the man who headed the corporation that owned the factory? 
lfic corporation to which you lent the money It was called Amalgam- 
ated Service, wasn't it? Who was its president?” 

“Oh, him? Yes, 1 remember him. His name was Lee Hunsacker. A 
very worthwhile young man, who's taken a terrible beating.” 

“Where is he now 7 Do you know his address?” 

“Why — I believe he's somewhere in Oregon. Orangeville. Oregon. 
My secretary can give you his address. But 1 don't see of what 
interest . . , Miss Taggart, if what you have in mind is to try to see 
Mr Wesley Mouch. let me tell you that Mr. Mouch attaches a great 
deal ol weight to my opinion in matters affecting such issues as rail- 
roads and other — ” 

“l have no desire to see Mr. Mouch,” she said, rising. 

“But then, I can't understand . . . What, really, was your purpose 
in coining here?" 

“I am trying to find a certain man who used to work for the Twenti- 
eth Century Motor Company." 

“Why do you wish to find him?” 

“I want him to work for my railroad.” 

He spread his arms wide, looking incredulous and slightly indignant. 
“At such a moment, when crucial issues hang in the balance, you 
choose to waste your time on looking for one employee? Believe me, 
the fate of your railroad depends on Mr. Mouch much more than on 
any ‘employee you ever find.” 

“Good day,” she said. 


291 



She had turned to go, when he said, his voice jerky and high, “You 
haven’t any right to despise me.” 

She stopped to look at him. “I have expressed no opinion.” 

“I am perfectly innocent, since I lost my money, since 1 lost all of 
my own money for a good cause. My motives were pure. I wanted 
nothing for myself. I’ve never sought anything for myself. Miss Tag- 
gart, l can proudly say that in ail of my life I have never made a 
profit!” 

Her voice was quiet, steady and solemn: 

“Mr, Lawson, I think I should let you know that of all the state- 
ments a man can make, that is the one I consider most despicable.” 

* * 

“I never had a chance!” said Lee Hunsacker. 

He sat in the middle of the kitchen: at a table cluttered with papers. 
He needed a shave; his shirt needed laundering. It was hard to judge 
his age: the swollen flesh of his face looked smooth and blank, un- 
touched by experience; the graying hair and filmy eyes looked worn 
by exhaustion; he was forty -two. 

“Nobody ever gave me a chance. 1 hope they’re satisfied with what 
they’ve made of me. But don’t think that I don’t know it. I know 1 
was cheated out of my birthright. Don’t let them put on any airs 
about how kind they are. They’re a stinking bunch of hypocrites.” 

“Who?” asked Dagny. 

“Everybody,” said Lee Hunsacker “People are bastards at heart 
and it’s no use pretending otherwise. Justice” Huh! Look at it!” His 
arm swept around him, “A man like me reduced to this!” 

Beyond the window, the fight of noon looked like grayish dusk 
among the bleak roofs and naked trees of a place that was not country 
and could never quite become a town. Dusk and dampness seemed 
soaked into the walls of the kitchen A pile of breakfast dishes lay in 
the sink: a pot of stew simmered on the stove, emitting steam with 
the greasy odor of cheap meat, a dusty typewriter stood among the 
papers on the* table. 

“The Twentieth Century Motor Company,” said Lee Hunsacker, 
‘*was one of the most illustrious names in the history of American 
industry. / was the president of that company. I owned that factory. 
But they wouldn’t give me a chance.” 

“You were not the president of the Twentieth Century Motor Com- 
pany, were you? 1 believe you headed a corporation called Amalgam- 
ated Service?” 

“Yes, yes, but it’s the same thing. We took over their factory. We 
were going to do just as well as they did, better. We were just as 
important. Who the hell was Jed Starnes anyway? Nothing but a back- 
woods garage mechanic — did you know that that’s how he stinted?— 
without any background at all. My family once belonged to the New 
York Four Hundred. My grandfather was a member of the! national 
legislature. It’s not my fault that my father couldn’t afford to give me 
a car of my own, when he sent me to school. All the other poys had 
cars. My family name was just as good as any of theirs. Whdn 1 went 
to college — ” He broke off abruptly. “What newspaper did you say 
you’re from?” 


292 



She had given him her name; she did not know why she now felt 
glad that he had not recognized it and why she preferred not to en- 
lighten him. “I did not say I was from a newspaper,” she answered. 
*T need some information on that motor factory for a private purpose 
of my own, not for publication.” 

“Oh.” He looked disappointed. He went on sullenly, as if she were 
guilty of a deliberate offense against him. “I thought maybe you came 
for an advance interview because I’m writing my autobiography.” He 
pointed to the papers on the table. “And what 1 intend to tell is 
plenty. I intend — Oh, hell!” he said suddenly, remembering something. 

He rushed to the stove, lifted the lid off the pot and went through 
the motions of stirring the stew, hatefully, paying no attention to his 
performance. He (lung the wet spoon down on the stove, letting the 
grease drip into the gas burners, and came back to the table. 

“Yeah. I’ll write my autobiography // anybody ever gives me a 
chance,” he said. “How can 1 concentrate on serious work when this 
is the sort of thing I have to do?” He jerked his head at the stove. 
"Friends, huh! Those people think that just because they took me in, 
they can exploit me like a Chinese coolie! Just because I had no other 
place to go. They have it easy, those good old friends of mine. He 
never lifts a finger around the house, just sits in his store all day; a 
lousy little two-bit stationery store-can it compute in importance with 
the book I’m writing? And she goes out shopping and asks me to 
watch her damn stew lor her. She knows that a writer needs peace 
and concentration, but does she care about that? Do you know what 
she did today?” He leaned confidentially across the table, pointing at 
the dishes in the sdnk. She went to the market and left all the break- 
last dishes there and said she'd do them later. I know what she 
wanted. She expected me to do them. Well, I'll fool her. I'll leave 
them just where they are.” 

“Would you allow me to ask you a few questions about the motor 
factoiy 0 ” 

“Don’t imagine that that motor factory was the only thing in my 
life. Fd held many important positions before. 1 was prominently con- 
nected, at various times, with enterprises manufacturing surgical appli- 
ances, paper containers, men’s hats and vacuum cleaners. Of course, 
that sott ol stuff didn’t give me much scope. Bui the motor factory — 
Ouit was my big chance. That was what Fd been waiting for.” 

“How did you happen to acquire it?” 

“It was meant for me. It was m> dream come Hue. Hie factory was 
shut down— bankrupt. The heirs of Jed Starnes had run it into the 
ground pretty fast. 1 don’t know exactly what it was. but there had 
been something goofy going on up there, so the company went broke. 
The railroad people closed their branch line. Nobody wanted the 
place, nobody would bid on it. But there it was. this great factory, 
with all the equipment, all the machinery', all the things that had made 
miliums for Jed Starnes. That was the kind at setup I wanted, the 
kind of opportunity l was entitled to. So l got a few friends together 
and we formed the Amalgamated Service Corporation and we scraped 
up a little money. But we didn't have enough, we needed a loan to 
help us out and give us a start. It was n perfectly safe bet, we were 

293 



young men embarking on great careers, full of eagerness and hope 
for the future. But do you think anybody gave us any encouragement? 
They did not. Not those greedy, entrenched vultures of privilege! How 
were we to succeed in life if nobody would give us a factory? We 
couldn't compete against the little snots who inherit whole chains of 
factories, could we? Weren't we entitled to the same break? Aw, don’t 
let me hear anything about justice! I worked like a dog, trying to get 
somebody to lend us the money. But that bastard Midas Mulligan put 
me through the wringer.’" 

She sat up straight. “Midas Mulligan?” 

“Yeah — the banker who looked like a truck driver and acted it, 
too!” 

“Did you know Midas Mulligan?” 

“Did 1 know him? Pm the only man who ever beat him -mot that 
it did me any good!” 

At odd moments, with a sudden sense of uneasiness, she had won- 
dered— as she wondered about the stones of deserted ships found 
floating at sea or of sourccless lights flashing in the sky— about the 
disappearance of Midas Mulligan. There was no reason why she lelt 
that she had to solve these riddles, except that they were mysteries 
which had no business being mysteries, they could not )>e causeless, 
yet no known cause could explain them. 

Midas Mulligan had once been the richest and, consequently, the 
most denounced man m the country. He had never taken a loss on 
any investment he made; everything he touched turned into gold “It's 
because 1 know what to touch,” he said. Nobody could grasp the 
pattern of his investments: he rejected deals that were considered 
flawlessly safe, and he put enormous amounts into ventures that no 
other banker would handle. Through the years, he had been the trig- 
ger that had sent unexpected, spectacular bullets ot industrial success 
shooting over the country It was he who had invested in Kearden 
Steel at its start, thus helping Reardon to complete the purchase of the 
abandoned sttMd mills m Pennsylvania When an economist referred to 
him once as an audacious gambler. Mulligan said. “The reason why 
you’ll never get rich is because you think that what l do is gambling.” 

It was rumored that one had to observe a certain unwritten rule 
when dealing with Midas Mulligan: if an applicant for a loan ever 
mentioned his peisonal need or any personal feeling whatever, the 
interview ended and he was never given another chance to speak to 
Mr. Mulligan. 

“Why yes. I can,” said Midas Mulligan, when he was asked whether 
he could name a person more evil than the man with a heart closed 
to pity. “The man who uses another's pity for him as a weapon.” 

In his long career, he had ignored all the public attacks on him, 
except one. His first name had been Michael; when a newspaper col- 
umnist of the humanitarian clique nicknamed him Midas Mulligan and 
the tag stuck to him as an insult. Mulligan appeared in erfurt and 
petitioned for a legal change of his first name to “Midas.” The* petition 
was granted. 

In the eyes of his contemporaries, he was a man who had committed 
the one unforgivable sin: he was proud of his wealth. 

294 



These were the things Dagny had heard about Midas Mulligan; she 
had never met him. Seven years ago, Midas Mulligan had vanished. 
He left his home one morning and was never heard from again. On 
the next day, the depositors of the Mulligan Bank in Chicago received 
notices requesting that they withdraw their funds, because the bank 
was closing. In the investigations that followed, it was learned that 
Mulligan had planned the closing in advance and in minute detail; his 
employees were merely carrying out his instructions. It was the most 
orderly run on a bank that the country ever witnessed. Every deposi- 
tor received his money down to the last fraction of interest due. All 
of the bank’s assets had been sold piecemeal to various financial insti- 
tutions. When the books were balanced, it was found that they bal- 
anced perfectly, to the penny; nothing was left over; the Mulligan 
Bank had been wiped out. 

No due was ever found to Mulligan’s motive, to his personal fate 
or to the many millions of his personal fortune. Jlie man and the 
fortune vanished as if they had never existed. No one had had any 
warning about his decision, and no events could be traced to explain 
it If he had wished to retire- - people wondered — why hadn’t he sold 
his establishment at a huge profit, as he could have done, instead of 
destroying it? There was nobody to give an answer. He had no tamily, 
no friends. His servants knew nothing: he had left his home that morn- 
ing as usual and did not come back; that was all 

There was — Dagny had thought uneasily for years — a quality of the 
impossible about Mulligan's disappear ance; it was as if a New York 
skysciapcr had vanished one night, leaving nothing behind but a va- 
cant lot on a street comer A man like Mulligan, and a fortune such 
as he had taken along with him, could not stay hidden anywhere; a 
skvsciaper could not get lost it would be seen rising above any plain 
or lorest chosen fox its hiding place: were it destroyed, even its pile 
of nibble could not remain unnoticed. But Mulligan had gone — and 
in the seven years since, in the mass of rumors, guesses, theories, 
Sunday supplement stones, and eyewitnesses who claimed to have 
seen him in every part of the world, no due to a plausible explanation 
had ever been discovered. 

Among the stories, there was one so preposterously out of character 
that Dagny believed it to be true: nothing in Mulligan’s nature could 
have given anyone ground to invent it. It was said that the last person 
to see him, on the spring morning of his disappearance, was an old 
woman who sold flowers on a Chicago street comer by the Mulligan 
Bank. She related that he stopped and bought a bunch of the year’s 
first bluebells. His face was the happiest face she had ever seen; he 
hail the look of a youth starting out into a great, unobstructed vision 
ol life King open before him; the marks of pain and tension, the 
sediment of years upon a human face, had been wiped off, and what 
remained was only joyous eagerness and peace He picked up the 
flowers as if on a sudden impulse, and he winked at the old woman, 
as if he had some shining joke to share with her. He said, “Do you 
know. how much I’ve always loved it — being alive?" She stared at 
him, bewildered, and he walked away, tossing the flowers like a ball 
in his hand — a broad, straight figure in a sedate, expensive, business- 

295 



man's overcoat, going oft into the distance against the straight cliffs 
of office buildings with the spring sun sparkling on their windows. 

“Midas Mulligan was a vicious bastard with a dollar sign stamped 
on his heart/’ said Lee Hunsackcr. in the fumes of the acrid stew. 
“My whole future depended upon a miserable half-million dollars, 
which was just small change to him, but when l applied for a loan, 
he turned me down flat— tor no better reason than that 1 had no 
collateral to ofter. How could l have accumulated any collateral, when 
nobody had ever given me a chance at anything big? Why did he lend 
money to others, but not to me? It was plain discrimination. He didn’t 
even care about my feelings— he said that my past recoid of failures 
disqualified me foi ownership ot a vegetable pushcart, let alone a 
motor factory. What failures? I couldn't help it if a lot of ignorant 
grocers refused to co-operate with me about the paper containers. By 
what right did he pass judgment on my ability? Why did my plans lor 
my own future have to depend upon the arbitrary opinion of a selfish 
monopolist? I wasn’t going to stand for that. I brought suit against 
him.” 

“You did w/inrT' 

“Oh, yes,” he said proudly. “! brought suit. I’m sure it would seem 
strange in some of your hidebound Eastern states, but the slate of 
Illinois had a very' humane, very progressive law under which 1 could 
sue him. 1 must say it was the first ease of its kind, but 1 had a very 
smart, liberal lawyer who saw a way for us to do it. It was an economic 
emergency law which said that people were forbidden to discriminate 
for any reason whatever against any person in any matter involving 
his livelihood. It was used to protect day laborers and such, but it 
applied to me and my partners as well, didn’t it? So we went to court, 
and we testified about the bad breaks we’d all had in the past, and I 
quoted Mulligan saving that i couldn't even own a vegetable pushcart, 
and we proved that all the members of the Amalgamated Service 
Corporation had no prestige, no credit, no way to make a living- - 
and. therefore, the purchase of the motor factory was our only chance 
of livelihood — and, therefore. Midas Mulligan had no right to diserimr 
nate against us — and, therefore, we were entitled to demand a loan 
from him under the law. Oh, we had a perfect case all right, but the 
man who presided at the trial was Judge Narraganscti, one of those 
old-fashioned monks of the bench who thinks like a mathematician 
and never feels the human side ot anything He just sat there all 
through the trial like a marble statue— like one of those blindfolded 
marble statues. At the end, he instructed the jury' to bring iri a verdict 
in favor of Midas Mulligan — and he said some very harsh things about 
me and my partners. But we appealed to a higher court fund the 
higher court reversed the verdict and ordered Mulligan to give us the 
loan on our terms. He had three months in which to antiply. but 
before the three months were up. something happened thajt nobody 
can figure out and he vanished into thin air, he and his batik. There 
wasn’t an extra penny left of that bank, to collect our lawjfu) claim. 
We wasted a lot of money on detectives, trying to find himr-as who 
didn't? — but we gave it up.” 

No — thought Dagny— no, apart from the sickening feeling it gave 

2 % 



her, this case was not much worse than any of the other things that 
Midas Mulligan had borne for years. He had taken many losses under 
laws of a similar justice, under rules and edicts that had cost him much 
larger sums of money; he had borne them and fought and worked the 
harder; it was not likely that this case had broken him. 

“What happened to Judge Narragansetl?” she asked involuntarily, 
and wondered what subconscious connection had made her ask it. 
She knew little about Judge NarraganscU. but she had heard and 
remembered his name, because it was a name that belonged so exclu- 
sively to the North American continent. Now she realized suddenly 
that she had heard nothing about him for years. 

“Oh, he retired/’ said Lee Hunsacker. 

“He did '" The question was almost a gasp. 

“Yeah/* 

“When 9 *’ 

“Oh, about six months later/* 

“What did he do alter he retired?” 

"\ don’t know-. I don’t think anybody's heard trom him since/’ 

He wondered why she looked tnghtened Part ot the tear she felt, 
was that she could not name its reason, either. “Please tell me about 
the motor factory,” she said with effort. 

“Well, F.ugene Lawson ot the Community National Bank in Madi- 
son finally gave us a loan to buy the factory— but he was just a messy 
cheapskate, he didn't have enough money to see us through, he 
couldn’t help us when we went bankrupt. It was not our fault. We 
had everything against us from the stait How could we run a factory' 
when we had no railroad 9 Weren't we entitled to a railroad? I tried 
to get them to reopen their branch line, but those damn people at 
Taggart Trans--*’ He stopped ‘Say, are you by any chance one of 
those Taggarts?” 

*i am the Operating Vice-President of Taggart Transcontinental.” 

For a moment, he stared at her m blank stupor; she saw the struggle 
of fear, obsequiousness and haired in his filmy eyes. The result was a 
sudden snarl: “1 don’t need any of you big shots! Don’t think Pm 
going to be afraid of you. Don't expect me to beg lor a job. Pm not 
asking tavors of anybody. I bet you’re not used to hear people talk 
to you this way. are you?” 

“Mr. Hunsacker. I will appreciate it very much if you will give me 
the information l need about the factory.” 

“You’re a little late getting interested. What's the matter? Your 
conscience bothering you? You people let Jed Starnes grow filthy rich 
on that factory, but you wouldn't give us a break. It was the same 
factory We did everything he did. We started right in manufacturing 
the particular type of motor that had been his biggest moneymaker 
for years. And then some newcomer nobody ever heard of opened a 
two-bit factory down in Colorado, by the name of Nielsen Motors, 
and put out a new motor of the same class as the Starnes model, at 
half the price! We couldn’t help that, could we? It was all right for 
Jed -Starnes, no destructive competitor happened to come up in his 
time, but what were we to do? How could we fight this Nielsen, when 
nobody had given us a motor to compete with his?” 

297 



“Did you take over the Starnes research laboratory?” 

“Yes. yes. it was there. Everything was there.” 

“His staff, too?” 

“Oh, some of them. A lot of them had gone while the factory 
was dosed.” 

“His research staff?” 

‘They were gone.” 

“Did you hire any research men of your own?” 

“Yes, yes, some — but let me tell you, I didn't have much money to 
spend on such things as laboratories, when I never had enough funds 
to give me a breathing spell. I couldn't even pay the bills I owed for 
the absolutely essential modernizing and redecorating which I d had 
to do — that factory was disgracefully old-fashioned from the stand- 
point of human efficiency. The executive offices had bare plaster walls 
and a dinky little washroom. Any modem psychologist will tell you 
that nobody could do his best m such depressing surroundings. 1 had 
to have a brighter color scheme in my office, and a decent modern 
bathroom with a stall shower. Furthermore. 1 spent a lot of money 
on a new cafeteria and a playroom and rest room for the workers. 
We had to have morale, didn’t we? Any enlightened person knows 
that man is made by the material factors of his background, and that 
a man s mind is shaped by his tools of production. But people 
wouldn't wait for the laws of economic determinism to operate upon 
us. We never had a motor factory before. We had to let the tools 
condition our minds, didn’t we? But nobody gave ns time.” 

“Can you toll me about the work of your research staff*” 

“Oh, l had 3 group of very promising young men, all ot them 
guaranteed by diplomas from the best universities. But it didn't do 
me any good, f don't know what they were doing. I think they were 
just sitting around, eating up thuii salaries.” 

“Who was in charge of your laboratory?” 

“Hell, how can 1 remember that now?” 

“Do you remember any of the names of your research staff?” 

“Do you think I had time to meet every' hireling in person?” 

“Did any of them ever mention to you any experiments with a . . . 
with an entirely new kind of motor?” 

“What motor? Let me tell you that an executive of my position 
does not hang around laboratories. I spent most of my time in New 
York and Chicago, trying to raise money to keep us going.” 

“Who was the general manager of the factory?” 

“A very able fellow by the name of Roy Cunningham. He died last 
year in an auto accident. Drunk driving, they said.” 

“Can you give me the names and addresses of any of, your associ- 
ates? Anyone you remember?” 

“I don't know what's become of them. I wasn't in a njood to keep 
track of that” 

“Have you preserved any of the factory records?” 

“f certainly have.” 

She sat eagerly. “Would you let me see them?” 

“You bet!” 

He seemed eager to comply; he rose at once and hUrned out of 

298 



the room. What he put down before her, when he returned, was a 
thick album of clippings: it contained his newspaper interviews and 
his press agent's releases. 

i was one of the big industrialists, too,” he said proudly. “I was a 
national figure as you can see. My life will make a book of deep, 
humane significance. Ld have written it long ago. if 1 had the proper 
tools of production.” He banged angrily upon his typewriter. “I can’t 
work on this damn thing. It skips spaces, flow can I get any inspiration 
and write a best seller with a typewriter that skips spaces?” 

“Thank you. Mr. Hunsacker,” she said. “1 believe this is all you 
can tell me — ” She rose. “You don’t happen to know what became 
of the Starnes heirs?” 

“Oh. they ran for cover after they'd wrecked the factory. There 
were three of them, two sons and a daughter. l^ast I heard, they were 
hiding their faces out in Durance, Louisiana.” 

The last sight she caught of Lee Hunsacker, as she turned to go, 
was his sudden leap to the strive: he sei/od the lid off the pot and 
dropped it to the floor, scorching his fingers and cursing: the stew 
was burned 

+ ■> 

Little was left of the Starnes fortune and less of the Starnes heirs. 

“You won’t like having to see them. Miss Taggart,” said the chief 
of police of Durance. I ouisiana: he was an elderly man with a slow, 
firm manner and a look of bitterness acquired not m blind resentment, 
hut in fidelity to clear-cut standards. “ There's all sorts of human beings 
to see in the woik). there’s murderers and criminal maniacs- -but. 
somehow. I think these Starnes poisons are what decent people 
shouldn't have to see They’re a bad sort. Miss Taggart. Clammy and 
bad . Yes, thev're still here in town— two of them, that is. The 
third one is dead. Suicide. That was lour years ago It’s an ugly story. 
He was the youngest of the three. Uric Starnes. He was one of those 
chronic young men who go around whining about their sensitive feel- 
ings, when they’re well past lorry. He needed love, was his line. He 
was being kept by older women, when he could find them. Then he 
started running aftei a girl ot sixteen, a nice gill who wouldn't have 
anything to do with him. She married a boy she was engaged to. Uric 
Starnes got into their house on the wedding day. and when they came 
back from church after the ceremony, they found him in their bed- 
rtHun, dead, messy dead, his wrists slashed. , . . Now l say there might 
be forgiveness for a man who kills himself quietly. Who can pass 
judgment on another man s suffering and on the limit ot what he c an 
bear? Hut the man who kills himself, making a show of his death in 
order to hurt somebody, the man who gives hts life for malice — there's 
no forgiveness for him, no excuse, he’s rotten clear through, and what 
he deserves is that people spit at his memory, instead of feelmg sorry 
for him and hurl, as he wanted them to be. . . . Well, that was Brie 
Starnes. I can tell you where to find the other two. if you wish.” 

She found Gerald Starnes in the ward of a flophouse. He lay half- 
twisted on a cot. His hair was still black, but the white stubble of hts 
chin was like a mist of dead weeds over a vacant face. He was soggy 

299 



drunk. A pointless chuckle kept breaking his voice when he spoke, 
the sound of a static, unfocused malevolence. 

u It went bust, the great factory. That’s what happened to it. Just 
went up and bust. Does that bother you, madame? The factory was 
rotten. Everybody is rotten. I’m supposed to beg somebody’s pardon, 
but I won’t, I don’t give a damn. People get fits trying to keep up the 
show, when it’s all rot, black rot, the automobiles, the buildings and 
the souls, and it doesn’t make any difference, one way or another. 
You should’ve seen the kind of literati who turned flip-flops when 1 
whistled, when I had the dough. The professors, the poets, the intellec- 
tuals, the world-savers and the brother-lovers. Any way 1 whistled. I 
had lots of fun. I wanted to do good, but now l don't There isn’t any 
good. Not any goddamn good in the whole goddamn universe. 1 don’t 
propose to take a bath if I don't feel like it, and that’s that. If you 
want to know anything about the factory', ask my sister. My sweet 
sister who had a trust fund they couldn't touch, so she got out of it 
safe, even if she’s in the hamburger class now, not the diet mignon a 
la Sauce Bearnaise, but would she give a penny of it to her brother? 
The noble plan that busted was her idea as much as mine, but will 
she give me a penny? Hah! Go take a look at the duchess, take a 
look. What do I care about the factory? It was just a pile of greasy 
machinery'. I’ll sell you all my rights, claims and title to it — foi a drink 
I’m the last of the Starnes name. It used to be a great name --Starnes, 
1*11 sell it to you. You think Pm a stinking bum, but that goes tor all 
the rest of them and for rich ladies like you, too. I wanted to do good 
for humanity. Hah! I wish they’d all boil in oil. Be lots of fun. I wish 
they’d choke. What does it matter*’ What does anything matter 7 ” 

On the next cot, a white-haired, shriveled little tiamp turned in his 
sleep, moaning; a . nickel clattered to the floor out of his rags. Gerald 
Starnes picked it up and slipped it into his own pocket. He glanced 
at Dagny. The creases of his face were a malignant smile. 

‘’Want to wake him up and start trouble?” he asked. “If you do. 
HI say that you're lying.” 

The ill-smelling bungalow, where she found Ivy Starnes, stood on 
the edge of town, by the shore of the Mississippi. Hanging strands of 
moss and dots of waxy foliage made the thick vegetation look as if 
it were drooling; the too many draperies, hanging in the stagnant air 
of a small room, had the same look. The smell came from undusted 
corners and from incense burning in silver jars at the feet of contorted 
Oriental deities. Ivy Starnes sat on a pillow like a baggy Buddha. Her 
mouth was a tight little crescent, the petulant rnouth of a child de- 
manding adulation — on the spreading, pallid face of a woman past 
fifty. Her eyes were two lifeless puddles of water. Her voice had the 
even, dripping monotone of rain: 

“I can’t answer the kind of questions you’re asking, my gifl. Hie 
research laboratory ? llte engineers? Why should I remember anything 
about them? It was my father who was concerned with such it* alters, 
not I. My father was an evil man who cared for nothing bul business. 
He had no time for love, only for money. My brothers and 1 I wed on 
a different plane. Our aim was not to produce gadgets, but to do 
good. We brought a great, new plan into the factory. It was eleven 

300 



years ago. We were defeated by the greed, the selfishness and the 
base, animal nature of men. It was the eternal conflict between spirit 
and matter, between soul and body. They would not renounce their 
bodies, which was all we asked of them. I do not remember any of 
those men. 1 do not care to remember. . . . The engineers? I believe 
it was they who started the hemophilia. ... Yes, that is what I said: 
the hemophilia — the slow leak — the loss of blood that cannot be 
stopped. They ran first. They deserted us, one after another . . * Our 
plan? We put into practice that noble historical precept: From each 
according to his ability, to each according to his need. Everybody in 
the factory, from charwomen to president, received the same salary — 
the barest minimum necessary. Twice a year, we all gathered in a 
mass meeting, where every person presented his claim for what he 
believed to be his needs. We voted on every claim, and the will of 
the majority established every person’s need and every person’s abil- 
ity. The income of the factory was distributed accordingly. Rewards 
were based on need, and the penalties on ability. Those whose needs 
were voted to be the greatest, received the most. Those who had not 
produced as much as the vote said they could, were fined and had to 
pay the fines by working overtime without pay. That was our plan. It 
was based on the principle of selflessness. It required men to be moti- 
vated, not by personal gain, but by love for their brothers." 

Dagny heard a cold, implacable voice saying somewhere within her: 
Remember it —remember it well — it is not often that one can see pure 
evil — look at it— remember and some day you’ll find the words to 
name its essence. . . . She heard it through the screaming of other 
voices that cried in helpless violence: It’s nothing — I’ve heard it be- 
fore — I’m hearing it everywhere -it s nothing but the same old tripe- 
why ain’t I stand it? - 1 can't stand it — 1 can t stand it! 

“What’s the matter with you, my girl? Why did you jump up like 
that? Why are you shaking? . . . What? Do speak louder, I can’t hear 
you. . . . How did the plan work out? 1 do not care to discuss it. 
Things became very ugly indeed and went fouler every year. It has 
cost me my faith in human nature. In four years, a plan conceived, 
not by the cold calculations of the mind, but by the pure love of the 
heart, was brought to an end in the sordid mess of policemen, lawyers 
and bankruptcy proceedings. But I have seen my error and I am free 
of it. I am through with the world of machines, manufacturers and 
money, the world enslaved by matter. I am learning the emancipation 
of the spirit, as revealed in the great secrets of India, the release from 
bondage to flesh, the victory over physical nature, the triumph of the 
spirit over matter." 

Through the blinding white glare of anger, Dagny was seeing a long 
strip of concrete that had been a road, with weeds rising from its 
cracks, and the figure of a man contorted by a hand plow. 

“But, my girl, I said that I do not remember. . . . But l do not 
know their names, l do not know any names, I do not know what 
sort of adventurers my father may have had in that laboratory! . . . 
Don’t you hear me? ... I am not accustomed to being questioned in 
such manner and . . . Don’t keep repeating it. Don’t you know any 
words but ‘engineer’? . . . Don’t you hear me at all? . , . What’s the 

301 



matter with you? I — I don't like your face* you're . . . Leave me alone. 
! don't know who you are. I’ve never hurt you* Lm an old woman, 
don't look at me like that, 1 , . . Stand hack! Don’t come near me or 
Pil call for help! Pll . . . Oh, yes, yes, 1 know that one! The chief 
engineer. Yes. He was the head of the laboratory. Yes. William Has- 
tings, That was his name — William Hastings. I remember. He went 
off to Brandon, Wyoming. He quit the day after we introduced the 
plan. He was the second man to quit us. . . . No. No, 1 don't remember 
who was the first. He wasn't anybody important.” 

* * 

The woman who opened the door had graying hair and a poised, 
distinguished look of grooming; it took Dagny a few seconds to realize 
that her garment was only a simple cotton housedress. 

“May 1 see Mr. William Hastings?” asked Dagny. 

The woman looked at her for the briefest instant of a pause; it was 
an odd glance, inquiring and grave. “May { ask your name?” 

“I am Dagny Taggart, of Taggart Transcontinental.” 

“Oh, Please come in. Miss Taggart, I am Mrs. William Hastings.” 
The measured tone of gravity went through every syllable of her voice, 
like a warning. Her manner was courteous, but she did not smile. 

It was a modest home in the suburbs of an industrial town. Bare 
tree branches cut across the bright, cold blue of the sky, on the top 
of the rise that led to the house. The walls of the living room were 
silver-gray; sunlight hit the crystal stand of a lamp with a white shade; 
beyond an open d<x>r, a breakfast nook was papered m red-dotted 
white. 

“Were you acquainted with my husband in business. Miss Taggart?" 

“No. I have never met Mr. Hastings. But l should like to speak to 
him on a matter of business of crucial importance.” 

“My husband died five years ago. Miss Taggart.” 

Dagny closed her eyes; the dull, sinking shock contained the conclu- 
sions she did, not have to make in words: Ibis, then, had been the 
man she was seeking, and Rearden had been right; this was why the 
motor had been left unclaimed on a junk pile. 

“I'm sorry,” she said, both to Mrs. Hastings and to herself. 

The suggestion of a smile or» Mrs. Hastings' face held sadness, but 
the face had no imprint of tragedy, only a grave look of firmness, 
acceptance and quiet serenity. 

“Mrs. Hastings, would you permit me to ask you a few questions?” 

“Certainly. Please sit down.” 

“Did you have some knowledge of vour husband's scientific work?” 

“Very little. None, really. He never discussed it at home.” 

“He was, at one time, chief engineer of the Twentieth Century 
Motor C ompany?” 

“Yes. He had been employed by them for eighteen yeans}” 

“I wanted to ask Mr. Hastings about his work there and the reason 
why he gave it up. If you can tell me, I would like to Mow what 
happened in that factory.” 

The smile of sadness and humor appeared fully on Mrs. ^Hastings' 
face, “That is what 1 would tike to know myself,” she said, “But I’m 
afraid I shall never leam it now. 1 know why he left the factory. It 

302 



was because of an outrageous scheme which the heirs of Jed Starnes 
established there. He would not work on such terms or for such peo- 
ple. But there was something else. I’ve always felt that something 
happened at Twentieth Century Motors, which he would not tell me.” 

"i’m extremely anxious to know any due you may care to give me/’ 

“1 have no clue to it. I’ve tried to guess and given up. I cannot 
understand or explain if. But 1 know that something happened. When 
my husband left Twentieth Century, we came here and he took a job 
as head of the engineering department of Anne Motors. It was a 
growing, successful concern at the time. It gave my husband the kind 
of work he liked. He was not a person prone to inner conflicts, he 
had always been sure of his actions and at peace with himself. But 
for a whole year after we left Wisconsin, he acted as if he were 
tortured by something, as if he were struggling with a personal prob- 
lem he could not solve. At the end of that year, he came to me one 
morning and told me that he had resigned from Acme Motors, that 
he was tetiring and would not work anywhere else. He loved his work; 
it was his whole life. Yet he looked calm, self-confident and happy, 
for the first time since we d come here. He asked me not to question 
him about the reason of his decision. I didn't question him and I 
didn't object. We had this house, we had our savings, we had enough 
to live on modestly for the rest of our days. I never learned his reason. 
We went on living here, quietly and very happily. He seemed to feel 
n profound contentment. He had an odd serenity of spirit that l had 
never seen in him before. There was nothing strange in his behavior 
or activity- except that at times, very lareiy, he went out without 
telling me where he went or whom he saw. In the last two years of 
his life, he went away for vine month, each summer; he did not tell 
me where. Otherwise, he lived as he always had. He studied a great 
deal and he spent his time on engineering research of his own, working 
in the basement of our house. 1 don't know what he did with his 
notes and experimental models. I found no trace of them m the base- 
ment. after his death. He died five years ago, of a heart ailment from 
which he had suffered tor some time.” 

Dagny asked hopelessly, “Did you know the nature of his experi- 
ments?” 

"No. I know very little about engineering.” 

"Did you know any of his professional friends or co-workers, who 
might have been acquainted with his research?” 

"No. When he was at Twentieth Century Motors, he worked such 
long hours that we had very little lime for ourselves and we spent it 
together. We had no social life at all. He never brought his associates 
to the house.” 

"When he was at Twentieth ( entury, did he ever mention to you 
a motor he had designed, an entirely new type of motor that could 
have changed the course of ail industry?” 

"A motor? Yes. Yt\s, he spoke of it several times. He said it was 
an invention of incalculable importance. But it was not he who had 
designed it It was the invention of a young assistant of his.” 

She saw the expression on Dagny’s face, and added slowly, quizzi- 
cally, without reproach, merely in sad amusement, "i see.” 

303 



"Oh, Pm sorry I’* said Dagny, realizing that her emotion had shot 
to her face and become a smile as obvious as a cry of relief. 

"it's quite aill right. I understand. It's the inventor of that motor 
that you're interested in. 1 don't know whether he is still alive, but at 
least I have no reason to think that he isn’t." 

*Td give half my life to know that he is — and to find him. It's as 
important as that, Mrs. Hastings. Who is he?" 

"I don't know. I don’t know his name or anything about him. I 
never knew any of the men on my husband's staff. He told me only 
that he had a young engineer who. some day, would up-tum the world. 
My husband did not care for anything in people except ability. I think 
this was the only man he ever loved. He didn't say so. but I could 
tell it, just by the way he spoke of this young assistant. I remember— 
the day he told me that the motor was completed — how his voice 
sounded when he said. And he's only twenty-six!’ Ibis was about a 
month before the death of Jed Starnes. He never mentioned the motor 
or the young engineer, after that." 

"You don't know what became of the young engineer?" 

"No." 

"You can't suggest any way to find him?" 

“No." 

"You have no clue, no lead to help me learn his name?” 

"None. Tell me. was that motor extremely valuable?" 

"More valuable than any estimate 1 could give you." 

"It’s strange, because, you see, I thought of it once, some years 
after we’d left Wisconsin, and 1 asked my husband what had become 
of that invention he'd said was so great, what would be done with it. 
He looked at me very oddly and answered, ‘Nothing.’ " 

"Why?" 

"He wouldn't tell me." 

"Can you remember anyone at all who worked at Twentieth Cen- 
tury? Anyone .who knew that young engineer? Any friend of his?" 

"No, 1 , . . Wait! Wait, I think I can give you a lead. 1 can tell you 
where to find one friend of his. I don’t even know that friend’s name, 
either, but 1 know his address. It's an odd story. I'd better explain 
how it happened. One evening — about two years after we’d come 
•here — my husband was going out and I needed our car that night, so 
he asked me to pick him up after dinner at the restaurant of the 
railroad station. He did not tell me with whom he was having dinner. 
When I drove up to the station, l saw him standing outside the restau- 
rant with two men. One of them was young and tall. The other was 
elderly; he looked very distinguished. I would still recognize those 
men anywhere; they had the kind of faces one doesn't forget. My 
husband saw me and left them. They walked away toward the station 
platform: there was a train coming. My husband pointed kfter the 
young man and said, "Did you see him? That’s the boy I $old you 
about.' 'The one who’s the great maker of motors?’ Ibe bne who 
was.' " 

"And he told you nothing else?" 

"Nothing else. This was nine years ago. Last spring, I weitt to visit 
my brother who lives in Cheyenne. One afternoon, he took the family 

m 



out tor a long drive. We went up into pretty wild country, high in the 
Rockies, and we stopped at a roadside diner. There was a distin- 
guished, gray-haired man behind the counter. 1 kept staring at him 
while he fixed our sandwiches and coffee, because 1 knew that 1 had 
seen his face before, but could not remember where. We drove on, 
we were miles away Irom the dmei, when I remembered. You'd better 
go there. Its on Route 86, in the mountains, west of Cheyenne, near 
a small industrial settlement by the Lennox Copper Foundry. It seems 
strange, but I'm certain of it the cook in that diner is the man 1 saw 
at the railroad station with my husband's young idol/’ 

* * 

The diner stood on the summit of a long, hard climb. Its glass wails 
spread a coal of polish over the view of rocks and pines descending 
m broken ledges to the sunset. It was dark below, but an even, glowing 
light still remained in the diner, as in a small pool left behind by a 
receding tide. 

Dagny sat at the end of the counter, eating a hamburger sandwich. 
It was the best-cooked food she had ever tasted, the product of simple 
ingredients and of an unusual skill. Two workers were finishing their 
dinner: she was watting for them to depart. 

She studied the man behind the counter. He was slender and tall, 
he had an air of distinction that belonged to an ancient castle or in 
the inner office of a bank: but his peculiar quality came from the fact 
that he made the distinction seem appropriate here, behind the 
counter of a diner. He wore a cook’s white jacket as if it were a full- 
dress suit. There was an expert competence in his manner of working; 
his movements were easy, intelligently economical He had a lean face 
and gray hair that blended in tone with the add blue of his eyes; 
somewhere beyond his look of courteous sternness, there was a note 
of humor, so taint that it vanished if one tried to discern it. 

Vhe two workers finished, paid and departed, each leaving a dime 
for a tip .She watched the man as he removed their dishes, put the 
dimes into the pocket of his white jacket, wiped the counter, working 
with swift precision. Then he turned and looked at her It was an 
impersonal glance, not intended to invite conversation; but she felt 
certain that he had long since noted her New York suit, her high- 
heeled pumps, her air of being a woman who did not waste her time; 
his cold, observant eyes seemed to tell her that he knew she did not 
belong here and that he was waiting to discover her purpose 

‘How is business?" she asked. 

‘Pretty bad. They’re going to close the Lennox Foundry next week, 
so 1 11 have to dose soon, loo, and move on." His voice was clear, 
impersonally cordial. 

“Where to?" 

"I haven't decided." 

"What sort of thing do you have in mind?" 

*1 don’t know. Frn thinking ot opening a garage, if 1 can find the 
right spot in some town.’* 

"Oh no! You’re too good at your job to change it. You shouldn't 
want to be anything but a cook.” 

305 



A strange, fine smile moved the curve of his mouth. “No?” he 
asked courteously. 

“No! How would you like a job in New York?" He looked at her, 
astonished. *Tm serious. I can give you a job on a big railroad, in 
charge of the dining-car department." 

"May I ask why you should want to?" 

She raised the hamburger sandwich in its white paper napkin. 
“There’s one of the reasons." 

“Thank you. What arc the others?" 

"I don’t suppose you’ve lived in a big city, or you'd know how 
miserably difficult it is to find any competent men for any job 
whatever.” 

“I know a little about that " 

“Well? How about it, then? Would you like a job in New York at 
ten thousand dollars a year?” 

"No” 

She had been carried away by the joy of discovering and rewarding 
ability. She looked at him silently, shocked. “1 don’t think you under- 
stood me," she said. 

"I did." 

"You’re refusing an opportunity of this kind?" 

"Yes." 

"But why**" 

“That is a personal matter.’' 

"Why should you work like this, when you can have a bettei job?" 

"I am not looking for a better job." 

“You don’t want a chance to rise and make money?" 

"No. Why do you insist?" 

"Because i hate to see ability being wasted!" 

He said slowly, intently, "So do I." 

Something in the way ho said it made her tec! the bond of some 
profound emotion which they held in common, it broke the discipline 
that forbade her ever to call for help. "I’m so sick of them!" Hei 
voice startled her. it was an involuntary cry. "I’m so hungry for any 
sight of anyone who’s able to do whatever it is he’s doing’" 

She pressed the back of her hand to her eyes, trying to dam the 
outbreak of a despair she had not permitted herself to acknowledge: 
she had not known the extent of it, nor how little of her endurance 
the quest had left her. 

*Tm sorry," he said, his voice low. It sounded, not as an apology, 
but as a statement of compassion. 

She glanced up at him. He smiled, and she knew that the smile was 
intended to break the bond which he, too, had felt: the smile had a 
trace of courteous mockery. He said, "But I don’t believe that you 
came all the way from New York just to hunt for railroad books in 
the Rockies." 

"No. 1 came for something else." She leaned forward both forearms 
braced firmly against the counter, feeling calm and in tight control 
again, sensing a dangerous adversary. "Did you know, about ten years 
ago, a young engineer who worked for the Twentieth Century Motor 
Company?" 


306 



She counted the seconds of a pause; she could not define the nature 
of the way he looked at her. except that it was the look of some 
special attentiveness. 

"Yes, I did," be answered. 

"Could you give me his name and address?” 

"What for?" 

"It s crucially important that 1 find him." 

“That man? Of what importance is he?" 

"He is the most important man in the world." 

"Really? Why?" 

"Did you know anything about his work?" 

"Yes." 

"Did you know that he hit upon an idea of the most tremendous 
consequence?" 

He let a moment pass. ‘‘May 1 ask who you are?" 

“Dagny Taggart. I’m the Vice-Pres--" 

"Yes, Miss Taggart. I know who you are." 

He said it with impersonal deference. But he looked as if he had 
found the answer to some special question m his mind and was not 
astonished any longer. 

"Then you know that rny interest is not kite,” she said, "I'm in a 
position to give him the chance he needs and Tm prepared to pay 
anything he asks." 

"May 1 ask what has aroused your interest m him?" 

“His motor." 

How did you happen to know about his motor?" 

"I found a broken remnant ol U m the rums of the Twentieth 
Century factors. Not enough to reconstruct jt or to leant how it 
worked. But enough to know that it did work and that it's an invention 
which can save my railroad, the country and the economy of the whole 
world. Don’t ask me to tell you now what trail Tve followed, trying 
to trace that motor and to find its inventor. That's not of any impor- 
tance, even my life and work are not ol any importance to me right 
now. nothing is of any importance; except that 1 must find hint. Don’t 
ask me how 1 happened to come to you. You're the end of the trail. 
I ell me his name." 

He had listened without moving, looking straight at her; the atten- 
tiveness of his eyes seemed to take hold of every word and store it 
carefully away, giving her n > due to his purpose. He did not move 
for a long time. Then he said, "Give it up, Miss Taggart. You won’t 
find him." 

"What is his name?" 

“I can tell you nothing about him." 

“Is he still alive?" 

"I can tell you nothing." 

"What is your name?” 

"Hugh Akston." 

Through the blank seconds of recapturing her mind, she kept telling 
herself: You’re hysterical . . . don’t be preposterous . . . it’s just a 
coincidence of names —while she knew, in certainty and numb, inexpli- 
cable terror, that this was the Hugh Akston. 

307 



“Hugh Akston?” she stammered. “The philosopher? . . . The last 
of the advocates of reason?” 

“Why, yes,” he answered pleasantly. “Or the first of their return.” 

He did not seem startled by her shock, but he seemed to find it 
unnecessary. His manner was simple, almost friendly, as if he felt no 
need to hide his identity and no resentment at its being discovered. 

“I didn't think that any young person would recognize my name or 
attach any significance to it, nowadays,” he said. 

“But . . . but what are you doing here?” Her arm swept at the 
room. “This doesn’t make sense!” 

“Are you sure?” 

“What is it? A stunt? An experiment? A secret mission? Are you 
studying something for some special purpose?” 

“No, Miss Taggart. I’m earning my living.” The words and the voice 
had the genuine simplicity of truth. 

“Dr. Akston, l . . . it’s inconceivable, it’s . . . You're . . . you're a 
philosopher ... the greatest philosopher living ... an immortal 
name , . , why would you do thisT* 

“Because I am a philosopher. Miss Taggart.” 

She knew with certainty— even though she felt as if her capacity 
for certainty and for understanding were gone - that she would obtain 
no help from him, that questions were useless, that he would give her 
no explanation: neither of the inventor’s fate nor of his own. 

“Give it up. Miss Taggart,” he said quietly, as if giving proof that 
he could guess her thoughts, as she had known he would, ‘It is a 
hopeless quest, the more hopeless because you have no inkling of 
what an impossible task you have chosen to undertake. I would like 
to spare you the strain of trying to devise some argument, trick or 
plea that would make me give you the information you are seeking. 
Take my word for it: it can’t be done. You said I'm the end of your 
trail. It’s a blind alley. Miss Taggart. Do not attempt to waste your 
money and effort on other, more conventional methods of inquiry: do 
not hire detectives. They will learn nothing. You mav choose to ignore 
my warning, bdt I think that you are a person of high intelligence, 
able to know that I know what I am saying. Give it up. Tfie secret 
you are trying to solve involves something greater — much greater— 
than the invention of a motor run by atmospheric electricity, rhea" 
is only one helpful suggestion that I can give you: By the essence 
and nature of existence, contradictions cannot exist. If you find it 
inconceivable that an invention of genius should be abandoned among 
ruins, and that a philosopher should wish to work as a cook in a 
diner — check your premises. You will find that one of them is wrong.” 

She started: she remembered that she had heard this before and 
that it was Francisco who had said it. And then she remembered that 
this man had been one of Francisco's teachers. 

“As you wish. Dr Akston,” she said. “1 won’t attempt to question 
you about it. But would you permit me to ask you a quesliod on an 
entirely different subject?” 

“Certainly.” 

“Dr. Robert Stadler once told me that when you were at the Patrick 
Henry University, you had three students who were your favorites 

308 



and his, three brilliant minds from whom you expected a great future. 
One of them was Francisco d’Anconia.” 

“Yes. Another was Ragnar DanneskjOld/’ 

“Incidentally — this is not my question — who was the third?” 

“His name would mean nothing to you. He is not famous.” 

“Dr. Stadler said that you and he were rivals over these three stu- 
dents, because you both regarded them as your sons.” 

“Rivals? He lost them.” 

“Tell me, are you proud of the way these three have turned out?” 

He looked off, into the distance, at the dying fire of the sunset on 
the iarthest rocks; his face had the look of a father who watches his 
sons bleeding on a battlefield. He answered: 

“More proud than I had ever hoped to be.” 

It was almost dark. He turned sharply, took a package of cigarettes 
from his pocket, pulled out one cigarette, but stopped, remembering 
her presence, as if he had forgotten it for a moment, and extended 
the package to her. She took a cigarette and he struck the brief flare 
of a match, then shook it out. leaving only two small points of fire in 
the darkness of a glass room and of miles of mountains beyond it 

She rose, paid her bill, and said, “Thank you. Dr. Akston. I will 
not molest you with tricks or pleas. 1 will not hire detectives. But 1 
think I should tell you that I will not give up. 1 must find the inventor 
of that motor. 1 will find him." 

‘Not until the day when he chooses to find you— as he will.” 

When she walked to her car, he switched on the lights in the diner, 
she saw the mailbox by the side of the road and noted the incredible 
fact that the name “Hugh Akston” stood written openly across if 

She had driven far down the winding road, and the lights of the 
diner were long since out of sight, when she noticed that she was 
enjoying the taste of the cigarette he had given her: it was different 
from any she had ever smoked before. She held the small remnant to 
the light of the dashboard, looking for the name of the brand. There 
was no name, only a trademark. Stamped in gold on the thin, white 
paper there stood the sign of the dollar. 

She examined it curiously: she had never heard of that brand before. 
Then she remembered the old man at the cigar stand of the Taggart 
Terminal, and smiled, thinking that this was a specimen for his collec- 
tion. She stamped out the fire and dropped the butt into her handbag. 

Train Number 57 was lined along the track, ready to leave for 
Wyatt Junction, when she reached Cheyenne, left her car at the garage 
where she had rented it, and walked out on the platform of the Tag- 
gart station. She had half an hour to wait for the east-bound main 
liner to New York. She walked to the end of the platform and leaned 
wearily against a lamppost; she did not want to be seen and recognized 
by the station employees, she did not want to talk to anyone, she 
needed rest. A few people stood in dusters on the half-deserted plat- 
form; animated conversations seemed to be going on, and newspapers 
were more prominently in evidence than usual. 

She looked at the lighted windows of Train Number 57 — for a mo- 
ment’s relief in the sight of a victorious achievement Train Number 
57 was about to start down the track of the John Galt Line, through 

309 



the town* through the curves of the mountains, past the green signals 
where people had stood cheering and the valleys where rockets had 
risen to the summer sky. Twisted remnants of leaves now hung on 
the branches beyond the train’s roof line* and the passengers wore 
furs and mufflers, as they climbed aboard. They moved with the casual 
manner of a daily event, with the security of expecting a performance 
long since taken for granted. . . . We've done it — she thought — this 
much, at least, is done. 

It was the chance conversation of two men somewhere behind her 
that came beating suddenly against her closed attention. 

“But laws shouldn’t be passed that way, so quickly.” 

‘•They’re not laws, theyVe directives." 

'Then it's illegal." 

“It's not illegal, because the Legislature passed a law last month 
giving him the power to issue directives." 

“I don't think directives should be sprung on people that way, out 
of the blue, like a punch in the nose." 

“Well, there's no time to palaver when it's a national emergency." 

“But I don’t think it’s right and it doesn't jibe. How is Reardon 
going to do it, when it says here—" 

"Why should you worry about Reardon ’ He’s neh enough. He can 
find a way to do anything." 

Then she leaped to the first newsstand in sight and seized a copy 
of the evening paper. 

It was on the front page. Wesley Mouch, Top Co-ordinator of the 
Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources. 'in a surprise 
move," said the paper, ‘and in the name of the national emergency." 
had issued a set of directives, which were strung in a column down 
the page: 

The railroads of the country were ordered to reduce the maximum 
speed of all trams to sixty miles per hour — to reduce the maximum 
length of all trams to sixty cars— and to run the same number of trains 
in every state of a zone composed of five neighboring slates, the 
country being divided into such zones for the purpose. 

The steel mills of the country were ordered to limit the maximum 
production of any metal alloy to an amount equal to the production 
of other metal alloys by other mills placed in the same classification 
of plant capacity — and to supply a fair share of any metal alloy to all 
consumers who might desire to obtain it. 

All the manufacturing establishments of the country, of any size 
and nature, were forbidden to move from their present locations, ex- 
cept when granted a special permission to do so by the Bureau of 
Economic Planning and National Resources. 

To compensate the railroads of the country for the extra costs in- 
volved and “to cushion the process of readjustment." a moratorium 
on payments of interest and principal on all railroad bonds|~ secured 
and unsecured, convertible and non-convertible — was declared for a 
period of five years. 

To provide the funds for the personnel to enforce these directives, 
a special tax was imposed on the state of Colorado, “as the istate best 
able to assist the needier states to bear the brunt of the national 

310 



emergency,” sufch tax to consist of five per cent of the gross sales of 
Colorado’s industrial concerns. 

The cry she uttered was one she had never permitted herself before, 
because she made it her pride always to answer it herself — but she 
saw a man standing a few steps away, she did not see that he was a 
ragged bum, and she uttered the cry because it was the plea of reason 
and he was a human figure: 

“What are we going to do?” 

The bum grinned mirthlessly and shrugged: 

“Who is John Galt?” 

It was not Taggart Transcontinental that stood as the focus of terror 
in her mind, it was not the thought of Hank Rearden tied to a rack 
pulled in opposite directions— it was Eliis Wyatt. Wiping out the rest, 
filling her consciousness, leaving no room for words, no time for won- 
der, as a flaring answer to the questions she had not begun to ask, 
stoixl two pictures: Ellis Wyatt’s implacable figure in front of her desk, 
saying, “It is now in your power to destroy me; I may have to go; 
but if 1 go. I'll make sure that 1 take all the rest of you along with 
me” —and the circling violence of Ellis Wyatt’s body when he flung 
a glass to shatter against the wall. 

The only consciousness the pictures left her was the feeling of the 
approach of some unthinkable disaster, and the feeling that she had 
to outrun it. She had to reach Ellis Wyatt and stop him. She did not 
know what it was that she had to prevent. She knew only that she 
had to stop him. 

And because, were she lying crushed under the ruins ot a building, 
were she tom by the bomb of an air raid, so long as she was still in 
existence she would know that action is man's foremost obligation, 
regal dless of anything he feels— she wms able to run down the plat- 
form and to see the face of the stationm aster when she found him — 
she was able to order: “Hold Number 57 for me!" — then to run to 
the privacy of a telephone booth in the darkness beyond the end of 
the platform, and to give the long-distance operator the number of 
Elhs Wyatt's house. 

She stood, propped up by the walls of the booth, her eyes closed, 
and listened to the dead whirl of metal which was the sound of a bell 
ringing somewhere. It brought no answer, lire bell kept coming in 
sudden spasms, like a drill going thiough her ear. through her body. 
She clutched the receiver as if. unheeded, it were still a form of con- 
tact.. She wished the bell were louder. She forgot that the sound she 
heard was not the one ringing in his house. She did not know that 
she was screaming, “Ellis, don't! Don't! Don't !” —until she heard the 
cold, reproving voice of the operator sav, ‘‘Your party does not 
answer,” 

She sat at the window of a coach of Tram Number 57, and listened 
to the clicking of the wheels on the rails of Rearden Metal. She sat, 
unresisting, swaying with the motion of the train. The black luster of 
the window hid the countryside she did not want to see. It was her 
second run on the John Galt I.inc, and she tried not to think of 
the first. 

The bondholders, she thought, the bondholders of the John Galt 

311 



Line— -if was to her honor that they had entrusted their money, the 
saving and achievement of years, it was on her ability that they had 
staked it, it was on her work that they had relied and on their own— 
and she had been made to betray them into a looters’ trap: there 
would be no trains and no life-blood of freight, the John Galt Lint- 
had been only a drainpipe that had permitted Jim Taggart to make a 
deal and to drain their wealth, unearned, into his pocket, in exchange 
for letting others drain his railroad — the bonds of the John Galt Line, 
which, this morning, had been the proud guardians of their owners’ 
security and future, had become in the space of an hour, scraps of 
paper that no one would buy. with no value, no future, no power, 
save the power to close the doors and stop the wheels of the last 
hope of the country — and Taggart Transcontinental was not a living 
plant, fed by blood it had worked to produce, but a cannibal of the 
moment, devouring the unborn children of greatness. 

The tax on Colorado, she thought, the tax collected from Ellis Wyatt 
to pay for the livelihood of those whose job was to tie him and make 
him unable to live, those who would stand on guard to see that he got 
no trains, no tank cars, no pipeline of Rearden Metal — Ellis Wyatt, 
stripped of the right of self-detense, left without voice, without weap- 
ons, and worse: made to be the tool of his own destruction, the 
supporter of his own destroyers, the provider of their food and of 
their weapons — Ellis Wyatt being choked, with his own bright energy 
turned against him as the noose — Ellis Wyatt, who had wanted to 
tap an unlimited source of shale oil and who spoke of a second 
Renaissance. . . . 

She sat bent over, her head on her arms, slumped at the ledge of 
the window — while the great curves of the green-blue rail, the moun- 
tains, the valleys, the new towns of Colorado went by in the dark- 
ness, unseen. 

The sudden jolt of brakes on wheels threw her upright. It was an 
unscheduled stop, and the platform of the small station was crowded 
with people, .all looking off in the same direction. Ihe passengers 
around her were pressing to the windows, staring. She leaped to her 
feet, she ran down the aisle, down the steps, into the cold wind 
sweeping the platform. 

Jn the instant before she saw it and her scream cut the voices of 
the crowd, she knew that she had known that which she was to see. 
In a break between mountains, lighting the sky, throwing a glow that 
swayed on the roofs and walls of the station, the hill of Wyatt Oil 
was a solid sheet of flame. 

Later, when they told her that Ellis Wyatt had vanished, leaving 
nothing behind but a board he had nailed to a post at the foot of 
the hill, when she looked at his handwriting on the board, she felt 
as if she had almost known that these would be the words: 

*T am leaving it as f found it. Take over It’s yours.” - 


312 



PART TWO 


EITHEMR 





Chapter 1 THE MAN WHO BELONGED ON EARTH 

Dr. Robert Startler paced his office, wishing he would not feel the 
cold. 

Spring had been late in coming. Beyond the window, the dead 
gray of the hills looked like the smeared transition from the soiled 
while of the sky to the leaden black of the river. Once in a while, 
a distant patch of hillside flared into a silver-yellow that was almost 
green, then vanished. The clouds kept cracking foi the width of a 
single sunray, then oozing dosed again. It was not cold in the office, 
thought Dr Sladler, it was that view that froze the place. 

It was not cold today, the chill was in his bones -he thought'— the 
stored accumulation of the winter months, when he had had to be 
distracted from his work by an awareness of such a matter as inade- 
quate heating and people had talked about conserving fuel ll was 
preposterous, he thought, this growing intrusion of the accidents of 
nature into the affairs of men: tt had never mattered before, if a 
winter happened to be unusually severe; if a flood washed out a 
section of railroad track, one did not spend two weeks eating canned 
\egetables; if an electric storm struck some power station, an estab- 
lishment such as the Slate Science Institute was not left without 
electricity for five days. Five days of stillness this winter, he thought, 
with the great laboratory motors slopped and irretrievable hours 
wiped out, when his staff had been working on problems that in- 
volved the heart of the universe. He turned angrily away from the 
window- -but stopped and turned back to it again. He did not want 
to see the book that lay on his desk. 

He wished Dr. Ferris would come. He glanced at his watch: Dr. 
Fen is was late— an astonishing matter— late for an appointment with 
him -Dr, Floyd Ferris, the valet of science, who had always faced 
him in a manner that suggested an apology for having but one hat 
to take oft 

lTiis was outrageous weather for the month of May. he thought, 
looking down at the river; it was certainly the weather that made 
him feel as he did, not the book. He had placed the book in plain 
view on his desk, when he had noted that his reluctance to see it 
was more than mere revulsion, that it contained the element of an 
emotion never to be admitted, He told himself that he had risen 

315 



from his desk, not because the book lay there, but merely because 
he had wanted to move, feeling cold. He paced the room, trapped 
between the desk and the window. He would throw that book in the 
ash can where it belonged, he thought, just as soon as he had spoken 
to Dr. Ferris. 

He watched the patch of green and sunlight on the distant hill, 
the promise of spring in a world that looked as if no grass or bud 
would ever function again. He smiled eagerly— and when the patch 
vanished, he felt a stab of humiliation, at his own eagerness, at the 
desperate way he had wanted to hold it. It reminded him of that 
interview with the eminent novelist, last winter. The novelist had 
come from Europe to write an article about him — and he, who had 
once despised interviews, had talked eagerly, lengthily, too lengthily, 
seeing a promise of intelligence in the novelist's face, feeling a cause- 
less, desperate need to be understood. The article had come out as 
a collection of sentences that gave hint exorbitant praise and garbled 
every thought he had expressed, (losing the magazine, he had felt 
what he was feeling now at the desertion of a sunray. 

All right — he thought, turning away from the window— he would 
concede that attacks of loneliness had begun to strike him at times; 
but it was a loneliness to which he was entitled, it was hunger lor 
the response of some living, thinking mind. He was so tired of all 
those people, he thought in contemptuous bitterness; he dealt with 
cosmic rays, while they were unable to deal with an electric storm. 

He felt the sudden contraction of his mouth, like a slap denying 
him the right to pursue this course of thought. He was looking at 
the book on his desk. Its glossy jacket was glaring and new; it had 
been published two weeks ago. But I had nothing to do with it’— 
he screamed to himself; the scream seemed wasted on a merciless 
silence; nothing answered it, no echo of forgiveness. The title on the 
book's jacket was Why Do You Hunk You Think? 

There was no sound in that courtroom silence within him, no pity, 
no voice <}f defense —nothing but the paragraphs which his great 
memory had reprinted on his brain: 

“Thought is a primitive superstition. Reason is an irrational idea. 
The childish notion that we are able to think has been mankind's 
costliest error.’’ 

“What you think you think is an illusion created by your glands, 
your emotions and, in the last analysis, by the content of your 
stomach." 

“That gray matter you’re so proud of is like a mirror in an amuse- 
ment park which transmits to you nothing but distorted signals from 
a reality forever beyond your grasp," 

"The more certain you feel of your rational conclusions, the more 
certain you are to be wrong. Your brain being an instrument of 
distortion, the more active the brain the greater the distortion." 

“The giants of the intellect, whom you admire so $nuch, once 
taught you that the earth was Hat and that the atom was the smallest 
particle of matter. The entire history of science is a progression of 
exploded fallacies, not of achievements." 

“The more we know, the more we learn that we know nothing." 

316 



“Only the crassest ignoramus can still hold to the old-fashioned 
notion that seeing is believing. That which you see is the first thing 
to disbelieve." 

“A scientist knows that a stone is not a stone at all. It is, in fact, 
identical with a feather pillow. Both are only a cloud formation of 
the same invisible, whirling particles. But, you say, you can’t use a 
stone for a pillow? Well, that merely proves your helplessness in the 
face of actual reality.” 

“The latest scientific discoveries — such as the tremendous achieve- 
ments of Dr. Robert Stadler— have demonstrated conclusively that 
our reason is incapable of dealing with the nature of the universe. 
These discoveries have led scientists to contradictions which are im- 
possible, according to the human mind, but which exist in reality 
nonetheless. If you have not yet heard it, my dear old-fashioned 
friends, it has now been proved that the rational is the insane.” 

“Do not expect consistency. Everything is a contradiction of every- 
thing else. Nothing exists but contradictions.” 

“Do not look for ‘common sense.’ To demand 'sense' is the hall- 
mark of nonsense. Natures does not make sense. Nothing makes 
sense. The only crusaders for sense’ are the studious type of adoles- 
cent old maid who can’t find a boy friend, and the old-fashioned 
shopkeeper who thinks that the universe is as simple as his neat little 
inventory and beloved cash register.” 

“Let us break the chains of the prejudice oalled Logic. Are we 
going to be stopped by a syllogism?” 

“So you think you’re sure of your opinions? You cannot be sure 
of anything. Are you going to endanger the harmony of your commu- 
nity, your fellowship with your neighbors, your standing, reputation, 
good name and financial security — for the sake of an illusion? For 
the sake of the mirage of thinking that you think? Are you going to 
run risks and court disasters -at a precarious time like ours— -by 
opposing the existing social order in the name of those imaginary 
notions of yours which you call your convictions? You say that you’re 
sure you’re right? Nobody is right, or ever can be. You feel that the 
world around you is wrong? You have no means to know it. Every- 
thing is wrong in human eyes— so why fight it? Don’t argue. Accept. 
Adjust yourself. Obey.” 

fhc book was written by Dr Floyd Ferris and published by the 
State Science Institute. 

“1 had nothing to do with it!” said Dr, Robert Stadler. He stood 
still by the side of his desk, with the uncomfortable feeling of having 
missed some beat of time, of not knowing how long the preceding 
moment had lasted. He had pronounced the words aloud, in a tone 
of rancorous sarcasm directed at whoever had made him say it. 

He shrugged Resting on the belief that self-mockery is an act of 
virtue, the shrug was the emotional equivalent of the sentence: 
You’re Robert Stadler, don't act like a high-school neurotic. He sat 
down at his desk and pushed the book aside with the back of his 
hand. 

Dr. 'Floyd Ferris arrived half an hour late. “Sorry,” he said, “but 
my car broke down again on the way from Washington and I had a 

317 



hell of a time trying to find somebody to fix it — there’s getting to 
be so damn few cars out on the road that half the service stations 
are closed.” 

There was more annoyance than apology in his voice. He sat down 
without waiting for an invitation to do so. 

Dr. Floyd Ferris would not have been noticed as particularly hand- 
some in any other profession, but in the one he had chosen he was 
always described as “that good-looking scientist/’ He was six feet 
tall and forty-five years old, but he managed to look taller and 
younger. He had an air ot immaculate grooming and a ballroom 
grace ot motion, but his clothes were severe, his suits being usually 
black or midnight blue. He had a finely traced mustache, and his 
smooth black hair made the Institute boys say that he used the same 
shoe polish on both ends of him. He did not mind repeating, in the 
tone of a joke on himself, that a movie producer once said he would 
cast him for the part of a titled European gigolo He had begun his 
career as a biologist, but that was forgotten long ago; he was famous 
as the Top C'o-otdinator of the State Science Institute. 

Dr. Sladler glanced at him with astonishment -the lack ot apology 
was unprecedented — and said drylv, “It seems to me that you are 
spending a gteal deal of your time in Washington " 

“But, Dr. Sladler. wasn't it you who once paid me the compliment 
ol calling me the watchdog of this Institute?” said Dr. Ferris pleas 
antly “Isn't that my most essential duty?” 

“A lew ot \our duties seem to be accumulating right aiound this 
place. Before I forget it. would you mind telling nte what's going on 
here about that oil shortage mess?” 

He could not understand why l>r. Fonts tacc tightened into an 
injured look “You will permit me to say that this is unexpected and 
unwarranted/’ said Dr. Feins in that tone ol formality which con 
coals p;un and reveals martyrdom “None of the authorities involved 
have found cause tor criticism. Wc have just submitted a detailed 
report on the progress ol the work to date to the Bureau ol F.co 
nomic Planning and National Resources, and Mr. Weslev Moueh has 
expressed himself as satisfied We have done our best on that project 
We have heard no one else describe U as a mess Considering the 
difficulties of the terrain, the hazards of the fire and the tact that it 
has been only six months since we ” 

“What are you talking about?” asked Dr Sladler 
"The Wvatt Reclamation Project. Isn’t that what you asked mc r 
"No,” said Dr. Stadler. “no. I , . Wait a moment. Ket me gel 
this straight. 1 seem to recall something about this Institute taking 
charge of a reclamation project. What is n that you're reclaiming?” 
"Oil,” said Dr Ferris. “The Wyatt oil fields” 

“That was a lire, wasn't it? In Colorado? I hat was y . . wait a 
moment . . that was the man who set fire to his own ejil wells/* 

*Tm inclined to believe that that's a rurnor created by public hys 
tcria/’ said Dr. Ferris dryly. “A rumor with some undc.sifable, unpa- 
triotic implications. I wouldn’t put too much faith in thos$ newspaper 
stories. Personally. I believe that it was an accident arid that Fllis 
Wyatt perished in the fire.” 


318 



“Well* who owns those fields now?” 

“Nobody — at the moment. There being no will or heirs, the gov- 
ernment has taken charge of operating the fields — as a measure of 
public necessity — for seven years. If Ellis Wyatt does not return 
within that time, he will be considered officially dead.” 

“Well, why did they come to you — to us, for such an unlikely 
assignment as oil pumping?" 

“because it is a problem of great technological difficulty, requiring 
the services of the best scientific talent available. You see, it is a 
matter of reconstructing the special method of oil extraction that 
Wyatt had employed. His equipment is still there, though in a dread- 
ful condition; some of his processes are known, but somehow there 
is no full record of the complete operation or the basic principle 
involved. That is what we have to rediscover.” 

“And how is it going?" 

“The progress is most gratifying. We have just been granted a new 
and larger appropriation. Mr. Wesley Mouch is pleased with our 
work. So are Mr. Balch of the Emergency Commission, Mr. Ander- 
son of Crucial Supplies and Mr. Pettibone of Consumers' Protection. 

I do not see what more could be expected of us. The project is 
fully successful." 

"Have you produced any oil?" 

“No, but we have succeeded in forcing a (low from one of the 
wells, to the extent of six and a half gallons, This, of course, is merely 
of experimental significance, but you must take into consideration 
I he fact that we had to spend three full months just to put out the 
lire, which has r.ow been totally— almost totally— extinguished. We 
have a much tougher problem than Wyatt ever had, because he 
started from scratch while we have to deal with the disfigured wreck- 
age of an act of vicious, anti-social sabotage which . . 1 mean to 
say, it is a difficult problem, but there is no doubt that we will be 
able to solve it." 

"Well, what 1 really asked you about was the oil shortage here, 
in the Institute. The level of temperature maintained in this building 
all winter was outrageous. They told me that they had to conserve 
oil. Surely you could have seen to it that the matter of keeping 
this place adequately supplied with such things as oil was handled 
more efficiently." 

"Oh, is that what you had in mind. Dr, Stadlcr? Oh, but 1 am so 
sorry!" The words came with a bright smile of relief on Dr. Ferris’ 
face; his solicitous manner returned. "Do you mean that the temper- 
ature was low enough to cause you discomfort?" 

"I mean that I nearly froze to death." 

But that is unforgivable! Why didn’t they tell me? Please accept 
my personal apology. Dr. Stadlcr, and rest assured that you will 
never be inconvenienced again. The only excuse ! can offer for our 
maintenance department is that the shortage of fuel was not due to 
their negligence, it was -* oh, 1 realize that you would not know about 
•I and such matters should not take up your invaluable attention— 
hut, you see, the oil shortage last winter was a nationwide crisis." 

319 



“Why? For heaven's sake, don’t tell me that those Wyatt fields 
were the only source of oil in the country?” 

"No. no. hut the sudden disappearance of a major supply wrought 
havoc in the enliie oil maiket, So the government had to assume 
control and impose oil rationing on the country, in order to ptotecl 
the essential enterprises. 1 did obtain an unusually large quota for 
the Institute — and only by the special fa\or of some very special 
connections -but I feel abjectly guilty if this proved insulfieient. Rest 
assured that it will not happen again. It is only a temporary emer- 
gency By neat winter, we shall ha\e the Wyatt fields back in produc- 
tion, and conditions will rctuin to normal Besides, as fai as this 
Institute is concerned, 1 made all the arrangements to convett our 
furnaces to coal, and it was to be done next month, only the Stockton 
Foundry in Colorado closed down suddenly, without notice they 
were casting parts for our furnaces, but Andrew Stockton retired 
quite unexpectedly, and now we have to wait till lus nephew reopens 
the plant/' 

“I see. Well, I trust that you will take care oi it among all your 
other activities.” Dr Stadlei shrugged with annoyance "It is becom- 
ing a little ridiculous— the nunthci ot technological ventures that an 
institution of science has to handle for the government." 

"But, Dr. Stadler — " 

"I know. I know it can’t be avoided. By the way, what is Proj- 
ect X?" 

Dr. Ferris' eyes shot to him swiftly- -an odd, bright glance o( aleit- 
ness, that seemed startled, but not frightened. “Where did you hcai 
about Project X. Dr Stadler?" 

“Oh, I heard a couple of vour younger boys saying something 
about it with an air of mystery you'd expect from amateur detectives 
TTiey told me it was something very secret/' 

"That's right, Dr. Stadler. It is an extremely secret lesearch project 
which the government has entrusted to us. And il is of utmost impor- 
tance that the newspapers get no word about it." 

“What's the X r * 

“Xylophone. Project Xylophone That is a axle name, of course. 
The work has to do with sound. But I am sure that it would not 
interest you. It is a purely technological undertaking." 

“Yes, do spare me the story. I have no time for your technologi- 
cal undertakings." 

“May I suggest that it would be advisable to refrain from men 
tioning the words 'Project X’ to anyone. Dr. Stadler?" 

“Oh, all right, all right. I must say l do not enjoy discussions of 
that kind." 

“But of course! And I wouldn’t forgive myself if I allowed your 
time to be taken up by such concerns. Please feel certain thal you 
may safely leave it to me." He made a movement to risf. “Now if 
this was the reason you wanted to see me please believe /that I--" 

“No," said Dr. Stadler slowly. “This was not the reason I wanted 
to see you." 

Dr. Ferris volunteered no questions, no eager offers of Service; he 
remained seated, merely waiting. 

320 



Dr. Stadler reached over and made the hook slide from the comer 
to the center of his desk, with a contemptuous flick of one hand. 
“Will you tell me, please,” he asked, “what is this piece of in- 
decency?” 

Dr. Ferris did not glance at the book, but kept his eyes fixed on 
Siadler’s for an inexplicable moment; then he leaned back and said 
with an odd smile, “1 feel honored that you chose to make such an 
exception for my sake as reading a popular book, litis little piece 
has sold twenty thousand copies in two weeks.” 

“1 have read it.” 

“And?” 

“I expect an explanation.” 

“Did you And the text contusing?” 

Dr. Stadler looked at him in bewilderment. “Do you realize what 
theme you chose to treat and in what manner? The style alone, the 
style, the gutter kind of attitude — for a subject of this nature!” 

“Do you think, then, that the content deserved a more dignified 
form of presentation?” The voice was so innocently smooth that Dr. 
Stadler could not decide whether this was mockery. 

“Do you realize what you're preaching in this book?” 

“Since you do not seem to approve of it. Dr. Stadler, I'd rather 
have you think that 1 wrote it innocently.” 

This was it, thought Dr. Stadler, this was the incomprehensible 
element in Ferris" manner: he had supposed that an indication of his 
disapproval would be sulticicnt, but Ferris seemed tu remain un- 
touched by it. 

“If a drunken lout could find the power to express himself on 
paper,” said Dr. Stadler. “if he could give voice to his essence — the 
eternal savage, leering his hatred of the mind- -this is the sort of 
book I would expect him to write. Hut to see it come from a scientist, 
under the imprint of this Institute!” 

“But, Dr. Stadler. this book was not intended to be read by scien- 
tists. It was written for that drunken lout.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“For the genet al public.” 

“But, good God! The feeblest imbecile should be able to see the 
dlaring contradictions in every one of your statements.” 

“Let us put it this way. Dr Stadler. The man who doesn't see 
that, deserves to believe all my statements.” 

“But you've given the prestige of science to that unspeakable stuff! 
It was all right for a disreputable mediocrity like Simon Pritchett to 
drool it as some sort of woozy mysticism — nobody listened to him. 
But you’ve made them think il*s science. Science! You’ve taken the 
achievements of the mind to destroy the mind. By what right did 
you use my work to make an unwarranted, preposterous switch into 
another field, pull an inapplicable metaphor and draw a monstrous 
generalization out of what is merely a mathematical problem? By 
what right did you make it sound as if I — //—gave my sanction to 
that book?” 

Dr. Ferris did nothing, he merely looked at Dr. Stadler calmly; 
hut the calm gave him an air that was almost patronizing. “Now, 

321 



you see, Dr. Stadler, you’re speaking as if this book were addressed 
to a thinking audience. If it were, one would have to be concerned 
with such matters as accuracy, validity, logic and the prestige of 
science. But it isn’t. It’s addressed to the public. And you have ah 
ways been first to believe that the public does not think.” He paused, 
but Dr. Stadler said nothing. “This book may have no philosophical 
value whatever, but it has a great psychological value.” 

‘'Just what is that?” 

‘ You see. Dr. Stadler, people don’t want to think. And the deeper 
they get into trouble, the less they want to think. But by some sort 
of instinct, they feel that they ought to and it makes them feel guilty. 
So they'll bless and follow anyone who gives them a justification for 
not thinking. Anyone who makes a virtue — a highly intellectual vir- 
tue — out of what they know to be their sin, their weakness and 
their guilt.” 

“And you propose to pander to that?” 

'That is the road to popularity.” 

“Why should you seek popularity?” 

Dr. Ferris' eyes moved casually to Dr. Sladler’s face, as if by pure 
accident. “We are a public institution,” he answered evenly, “sup- 
ported by public funds.” 

“So you tell people that science is a futile fraud which ought to 
be abolished!” 

“That is a conclusion which could be drawn, in logic, from m\ 
book. But that is not the conclusion they will draw.” 

“And what about the disgrace to the Institute in the eyes of the 
men of intelligence, wherever such may be left?” 

“Why should we worry about them?” 

Dr. Stadler could have regarded the sentence as conceivable, had 
it been uttered with hatred, envy or malice; but the absence of any 
such emotion, the casual ease of the voice, an ease suggesting a 
chuckle, hit him like a moment’s glimpse of a icalm that could not 
be taken as part of reality; the thing spreading down to his stomach 
was cold terror. 

‘•Did you observe the reactions to my book. Dr. Stadia? It was 
received with considerable favor.” 

“Yes — and that is what I find impossible to believe.” He had to 
speak, he had to speak as if this were a civilized discussion, he could 
not allow himself time to know what it was he had felt for a moment 
“1 am unable to understand the attention voti received in all the 
reputable academic magazines and how they could permit themselves 
to discuss your book seriously. If Hugh Akston were around, no 
academic publication would have dared to treat this as a work admis- 
sible into the realm of philosophy.” 

“He is not around.” 

Dr. Stadler felt that there were words which he was J now called 
upon to pronounce — and he wished he could end this conversation 
before he discovered what they were. 

“On the other hand,” said Dr. Ferris, “the ads for mj£ book— oh, 
Tm sure you wouldn’t notice such things as ads — quotd a letter of 
high praise which I received from Mr, Wesley Mouch.” 

322 



“Who the hell is Mr. Wesley Mouch?” 

Dr. Ferris smiled. “In another year even you won’t ask that ques- 
tion, Dr. Stadler. Let us put it this way: Mr, Mouch is the man who 
is rationing oil — for the time being.” 

“Then 1 suggest that you stick to your job. Deal with Mr. Mouch 
and leave him the realm of oil furnaces, but leave the realm of ideas 
to me.” 

“!t would be curious to try to formulate the line of demarcation,” 
said Dr. Ferris, in the tone of an idle academic remark. “But if we’re 
talking about my hook, why, then we’re talking about the realm of 
public relations.” He turned to point solicitously at the mathematical 
formulas chalked on the blackboard. “Dr. Stadler, it would be disas- 
trous if you allowed the realm of public relations to distract you 
from the work which you alone on earth are capable of doing.” 

It was said with obsequious deference, and Dr. Stadler could not 
tell what made him hear in it the sentence. “Slick to your black- 
board!” He felt a biting irritation and he switched it against himself, 
thinking angrily that he had to get rid of these suspicions. 

“Public relations?” he said contemptuously. “1 don’t see any prac- 
tical purpose in your book. I don't see what it’s intended to accom- 
plish.” 

“Don’t you?” Dr. Fen is* eyes flickered briefly to his face; the 
sparkle of insolence was too swift to be identified with certainty. 

”1 cannot permit myself to consider certain things as possible in 
a civilized society,” Dr Stadler said sternly. 

“That is admirably exact.” said Dr. Perris cheerfully. “You cannot 
permit yourself.” 

Dr. Ferris rose, being first to indicate that the interview was ended. 
“Please call for me whenever anything occurs in this Institute to 
cause you discomfort. Dr. Stadler,” he said. “It is my privilege always 
to be at your service,” 

Knowing that he had to assert his authority, smothering the shame- 
ful realization of the sort of substitute he was choosing. Dr. Stadler 
said imperiously, in a tone of sarcastic rudeness, “The next time 1 
call for you, you’d better do something about that car of yours.” 

“Yes. Dr. Stadler, I shall make certain never to be late again, and 
l beg you to forgive me.” Dr. Ferris responded as if playing a pari 
on cue; as if he were pleased that Dr. Stadler had learned, at last, 
the modern method ol communication. “My car has been causing 
me a great deal of trouble, it’s falling to pieces, and 1 had ordered 
a new one some time ago. the best one on the market, a Hammond 
convertible —but Lawrence Hammond went out of business last 
week, without reason or warning, so now I’m stuck. Those bastards 
seem to be vanishing somewhere. Something will have to be done 
about it.” 

When Ferris had gone, Dr. Stadler sat at his desk, his shoulders 
shrinking together, conscious only of a desperate wish not to be seen 
by anyone. In the fog of the pain which he would not define, there 
*as also the desperate feeling that no one — no one of those he 
valued— would ever wish to sec him again. 

He knew the words which he had not uttered. He had not said 

323 



that he would denounce the book in public and repudiate it in the 
name of the institute. He had not said it, because he had been afraid 
to discover that the threat would leave Ferris unmoved, that Ferris 
was safe, that the word of Dr. Robert Stadter had no power any 
longer. And while he told himself that he would consider later the 
question of making a public protest, he knew that he would not 
make it. 

He picked up the book and let it drop into the wastebasket 
A face came to his mind, suddenly and clearly, as if he were seeing 
the purity of its every line, a young face he had not permitted himself 
to recall for years. He thought: No, he has not read this book, he 
won't see it, he's dead, he must have died long ago ... 1 he sharp 
pain was the shock of discovering simultaneously that this was the 
man he longed to see more than any other being in the world — and 
that he had to hope that this man was dead. 

He did not know why --when the telephone King and his secretary 
told him that Miss Dagny laggait was on the line- why he seized 
the receiver with eagerness and noticed that his hand was trembling. 
She would never want to see him again, he had thought for over a 
year. He heard her clear, impersonal voice asking for an appointment 
to see him, "Yes. Miss Taggart, certainly, yes, indeed. . . . Monday 
morning? Yes— look. Miss Taggart, 1 have an engagement in New 
York today. I could drop m at your office this afternoon, if you 
wish. . . . No, no— no trouble at all, I'll be delighted. . This 
afternoon. Miss Taggart, about two 1 mean, about four o’clock." 

He had no engagement in New Yoik. He did not give himself 
time to know what had prompted him to do it. He was smiling 
eagerly, looking at a patch of sunlight on a distant lull 

♦ * 

Dagny drew a black line across Train Number M3 on the schedule, 
and felt a moment’s desolate satisfaction in noting that she did it 
calmly. It was an action which she had had to perform many times 
in the test, six months It had been hard, at first: it was becoming 
easier. The day would come, she thought, when she would be able 
to deliver that death stroke even without the small salute of an effort. 
Train Number <J3 was a freight that had earned its living by cany mg 
supplies to Hammondsville. Odor ado 
She knew what steps would come next: first, the death of the 
special freights — then the shrinking in the number of boxcars for 
Hammondsville. attached, like poor relatives, to the rear end of 
freights bound for other towns — then the gradual cutting of the stops 
at Hammondsville Station from the schedules of the passenger 
trains— -then the day when she would strike Hammondsville. C olo 
rado, off the map. That had been the progression of Wyatt Junction 
and of the town called Stockton * 

She knew — once word was received that L awrence Hammond had 
retired — that it was useless to wait, to hope and to wontJjer whether 
his cousin, his lawyer or a committee of local citizens would reopen 
the plant. She knew it was time to start cutting the schedules. 

It had lasted less than six months after Ellis Wyatt lad gone— 
that period which a columnist had gleefully called ‘ the field day of 

324 



the little fellow.” Every oil operator in the country, who owned three 
wells and whined that Ellis Wyatt left him no chance of livelihood, 
had rushed to fill the hole which Wyatt had left wide open. They 
formed leagues, cooperatives, associations; they pooled their re- 
sources and their letterheads. “The little fellow’s day in the sun,” 
the columnist had said. Their sun had been the flames that twisted 
through the derricks ot Wyatt Oil. In its glare, they made the kind 
of fortunes they had dreamed about, fortunes requiring no compe- 
tence or effort. Then their biggest customers, such as power compa- 
nies, who drank oil by the trainful and would make no allowances 
for human frailty, began to convert to coal — and the smaller custom- 
ers, who were more tolerant, began to go out of business— the boys 
in Washington imposed rationing on oil and an emergency tax on 
employers to support the unemployed oil field workers — then a few 
of the big oil companies closed down— then the little fellows in the 
sun discovered that a drilling bit which had cost a hundred dollars, 
now cost them live hundred, there being no market for oil field 
equipment, and the suppliers having to earn on one drill what they 
had earned on five, or perish — then the pipe lines began to close, 
there being no one able to pay tor their upkeep — then the railroads 
were granted permission to raise their freight rates, there being little 
oil to carry and the cost of running tank trains having crushed two 
small lines out of existence — and when the sun went down, they saw 
that the operating costs, which had once permitted them to exist on 
their sixty-acre fields, had been made possible by the miles of Wyatt’s 
hillside and had gone in the same coils of smoke. Not until their 
fortunes had vanished and their pumps had stopped, did the little 
fellows realize that no business in the country could afford to buy 
ml at the price it would now lake them to produce it. Then the boys 
in Washington granted subsidies to the oil operators, but not all of 
the oil operators had friends in Washington, and there followed a 
situation which no one cared to examine too closely or to discuss. 

Andrew Stockton had been m the sort of position which most of 
the businessmen envied. The rush to convert to coal had descended 
upon his shoulders like a weight of gold he had kept his plant work- 
ing around the clock, running a race with next winter’s blizzards, 
casting parts for coal-burning stoves and furnaces. There were not 
many dependable foundries left; he had become one of the main 
pillars supporting the cellars and kitchens of the country. The pillar 
collapsed without warning. Andrew Stockton announced that he was 
retiring, closed his plant and vanished. He left no word on what he 
wished to be done with the plant or whether his relatives had the 
right to reopen it. 

There still were cars on the roads of the country, but they moved 
bke travelers in the desert, who ride past the warning skeletons of 
horses bleached by the sun: they moved past the skeletons of cars 
that had collapsed on duty and had been left in the ditches by the 
Mde of the road. People were not buying cars any longer, and the 
automobile factories were closing. But there were men still able to 
get oil,' by means of friendships that nobody cared to question. These 
men bought cars at any price demanded. Lights flooded the moun- 

325 



tains of Colorado from the great windows of the plant, where the 
assembly belts of Lawrence Hammond poured trucks and cars to 
the sidings of Taggart Transcontinental. The word that Lawrence 
Hammond had retired came when least expected, brief and sudden 
like the single stroke of a bell in a heavy stillness. A committee of 
local citizens was now broadcasting appeals on the radio, begging 
Lawrence Hammond, wherever he was, to give them permission to 
reopen his plant. There was no answer. 

She had screamed when Ellis Wyatt went; she had gasped when 
Andrew Stockton retired; when she heard that Lawrence Hammond 
had quit, she asked impassively, “Who's next?” 

“No, Miss Taggart, l can’t explain it,” the sister of Andrew Stock- 
ton had told her on her last trip to Colorado, two months ago. “He 
never said a word to me and 1 don't even know whether he’s dead 
or living, same as Ellis Wyatt. No, nothing special had happened the 
day before he quit. 1 remember only that some man came to see 
him on that last evening. A stranger I’d never seen before. They 
talked late into the night— when l went to sleep, the light was still 
burning in Andrew's study ” 

People were silent in the towns of Colorado. Dagny had seen the 
way they walked in the streets, past their small drugstores, hardware 
stores and grocery markets: as if they hoped that the motions ot 
their jobs would save them from looking ahead at the future She. 
too, had walked through those streets, trying not to lift her head, 
not to see the ledges of sooted rock and twisted steel, which had 
been the Wvatl oil fields. They could be seen from many of the 
towns; when she had looked ahead, she had seen them in the 
distance. 

One well. .on the crest of the hill, was still burning. Nobody had 
been able to extinguish it. She had seen it from the sheets- a spurt 
of fire twisting convulsively against the sky, as if trying to tear loose. 
She had seen it at night, across the distance ot a hundred clear, black 
miles, from the window of a train; a small, violent flame, waving in 
the wind. People called it Wyatt’s I'orch. 

Hie longest train on the John Galt Line had forty ears; the lastest 
ran at fifty miles an hour. The engines had to be spared: they were 
coal-burning engines, long past theii age of retirement. Jim obtained 
the oil for the Diesels that pulled the Comet and a few of their 
transcontinental freights. ITie only source ot fuel she could count on 
and deal with was Ken Danagger of Danagger C oal in Pennsylvania 

Empty trains clattered through the four states that were tied, as 
neighbors, to the throat of Colorado. They carried a few carloads of 
sheep, some corn, some melons and an occasional farmer with an 
overdressed family, who had friends in Washington. Jpn hail ob 
tamed a subsidy from Washington for every train that Was run, not 
as a profit-making carrier, but as a service of “public equality ” 

It took every scrap of her energy to keep trains running through 
the sections where they were still needed, in the areas that were still 
producing. But on the balance sheets of Taggart Transcontinental, 
the checks of Jim’s subsidies for empty trains bore larger figures 

326 



than the profit brought by the best freight train of the busiest indus- 
trial division. 

Jim boasted that this had been the most prosperous six months in 
Taggart history. Listed as profit, on the glossy pages of his report to 
the stockholders, was the money he had not earned— the subsidies 
for empty trains; and the money he did not own— the sums that 
should have gone to pay the interest and the retirement of Taggart 
bonds, the debt which, by the will of Wesley Mouch, he had been 
permitted not to pay. He boasted about the greater volume of freight 
carried by Taggart trains in Arizona — where Dan Conway had closed 
the last of the Phoenix-Durango and retired; and in Minnesota — 
where Paul Larkin was shipping iron ore by rail, and the last of the 
ore boats on the Great Lakes had gone out of existence. 

‘'You have always considered money-making as such an important 
virtue,” Jim had said to her with an odd half-smile. “Well, it seems 
to me that Pm better at it than you are.” 

Nobody professed to understand the question of the frozen rail- 
road bonds; perhaps, because everybody understood it too well. At 
first, there had been signs of a panic among the bondholders and of 
a dangerous indignation among the public. Then, Wesley Mouch had 
issued another directive, which ruled that people could get their 
bonds “defrozen” upon a plea of “essential need”: the government 
would purchase the bonds, if it found the proof of the need satisfac- 
tory. There were three questions that no one answered or asked: 
“What constituted proof?” “What constituted need?” “Essential— 
to whom?” 

1 hen it became bad manners to discuss why one man received the 
grant defreezing his money, while another had been refused. People 
turned away in mouth-pinched silence, if anybody asked a “why?” 
One was supposed to describe, not to explain, to catalogue facts, not 
lo evaluate them: Mr. Smith had been defro/en, Mr Jones had not; 
that was all. And when Mr. Jones committed suicide, people said, 
'Well, l don't know, if he’d really needed his money, the government 
would have given it to him, but some men are just greedy.” 

One was not supposed to speak about the men who, having been 
refused, sold their bonds lor one-third of the value to other men 
who possessed needs which, miraculously, made thirty-three frozen 
cents melt into a whole dollar; or about a new profession practiced 
by bright young boys just out of college, who called themselves 
“defree/ers” and offered their services “to help you draft your appli- 
cation in the proper modern terms.” The boys had friends in Wash- 
ington 

Looking at the Taggart rail from the platform of some country 
station, she had found herself feeling, not the brilliant pride she had 
once felt, but a foggy, guilty shame, as if some foul kind of rust had 
crown on the metal, and worse: as if the rust had a tinge of blood. 
Hut then, in the concourse of the Terminal, she looked at the statue 
of Nat Taggart and thought: ft was your rail, you made it, you fought 
for it, you were not stopped by fear or by loathing— I won't surren- 
der it to the men of blood and rust— and Pm the only one left to 
guard it. 


327 



She had not given up her quest for the man who invented the 
motor. It was the only part of hei work that made her able to hear 
the rest. It was the only goal in sight that gave meaning to her 
struggle. There were times when she wondered why she wanted to 
rebuild the motor. What for? — some voice seemed to ask her Be- 
cause I'm still alive, she answered. But her quest had remained futile. 
Her two engineers had found nothing m Wisconsin She had sent 
them to search through the count* v tor men who had worked tor 
Twentieth Century, to learn the name of the inventor. They had 
learned nothing. She had sent them to search through the hies of 
the Patent Olftce; no patent tor the motor had ever been registered 

The only temnant of her personal quest was the stuh of the ciga- 
rette with the dollar sign. She had forgotten it, until a i event evening, 
when she had found it in a drawer of het desk and given it to her 
triend at the cigar counter of the eoncouise The old man had been 
very astonished, as he examined the stub, holding it cautiously be- 
tween two tinge is; he had never heard of such a brand and wondered 
how he could haw missed it. "Was it of good quality. Miss Taggart?" 
" The best I’\e ever smoked.*” He had shaken his head, puzzled He 
had promised to discover where those cigarettes were made and to 
get her a carton. 

She had tried to find a scientist able to attempt the tcconst ruction 
of the motor. She had interviewed the men recommended to her as 
the best in their field. The first one, after studying the remnants of 
the motor and of the manuscript, had declared, in the tone of a drill 
sergeant, that the thing could not work, had ncvei worked and he 
would prove that no such motor could ever be made to work The 
second one had drawled, in the tone of an answer to a boring imposi- 
tion, that he did not know whether it could be done or not and did 
not care to find out. The third had said, his voice belligerently inso- 
lent, that he would attempt the task on a ten year contract at twenty- 
five thousand dollars a year -"After all. Miss Taggart, if you expect 
to make huge profits on that motor, it’s you who should pay for the 
gamble of my time.” The fourth, who was the youngest, had looked 
at her silently for a moment and the lines of his face had slithered 
from blankness into a suggestion of contempt. "You know. Miss 
Taggart, I don’t think that such a motor should ever be made, even 
if somebody did learn how to make it. It would be so superior to 
anything we’ve got that it would be unfair to lesser scientists, because 
it would leave no field for their achievements and abilities. I don't 
thmk that the strong should have the right to wound the self-esteem 
of the weak." She had ordered him out of her office, and had sat in 
incredulous horror before the fact that the most vicious statement 
she had ever heard had been uttered in a tone of moral 
righteousness. 

The decision to speak to Dr. Robert Stadler had been her last 
recourse. 

She had forced herself to call him, against the resistance of some 
immovable point within her that felt like brakes s)arnme|) tight. She 
had argued against herself. She had thought: I deal with men like 
Jim and Orren Boyle — his guilt is less than theirs— why can't I speak 

328 



to him? Shu had found no answer, only a stubborn sense of reluc- 
tance, only the feeling that of all the men on earth. Dr Robert 
Sladler was the one she must not call. 

As she sal at her desk, over the schedules of the John Galt lane, 
waiting tor Dr Sladler to come, she wondered why no first-rate 
talent had risen in the held of science lor years She was unable to 
look lor an answer. She was looking at the black line which was the 
corpse of I rani Number 93 on the schedule before her 

\ train has the two great attributes of hie. she thought, motion 
and purpose: this had been like a living entity, but now it was only 
a number ol dead freight cars and engines. Don't give yourself time 
to led, she thought, dismember the carcass as fast as possible, the 
engines are needed all over the system. Ken Danagger in Pennsylva- 
nia needs trains, more trams if only-- 

"Dr. Robert Sladler,' said the voice of the inter otficc communica- 
tor on her desk. 

He came in. smiling; the smile seemed to underscore his words: 
"Miss Taggart, would you wue to believe how helplessly glad l am 
to see you again 7 '' 

She did not smile, she looked gravely courteous as she answered, 
"It was very kind of you to come here." She bowed, her slender 
figure standing taully straight but tor the stow, formal movement of 
her head. 

' Whm il 1 confessed that all 1 needed was some plausible excuse 
m order to come 7 Would it astonish you?” 

“1 would try not to overtax \oui courtesy ’* She did not smile. 
"Please sit down. Dr. Sladler." 

He looked brightly around him. "I've never seen the office of a 
railroad executive. I didn’t know it would be so . . . so solemn a 
place. Is that in the naluie of the job 7 ** 

"The mattei on which I'd like to ask your advice is far removed 
ftom the field of your interests. Dr. Sladler. You may think it odd 
that l should call on vou. Please allow me to explain my reason." 

“ The fact that you wished to call on me is a fully sufficient reason. 
If I can be of anv service to you. any service whatever, I don't know 
what would please me mote at this moment." His smile had an 
attractive quality, the smile of a man of the world who used it, not 
to cover his words, but to stress the audacity of expressing a sin- 
cere emotion. 

'My problem is a matter of technology/' she said, in the dear, 
expressionless tone of a young mechanic discussing a difficult assign- 
ment. ‘i fully realize your contempt tor that branch of science. I do 
not expect you to solve my problem — it is not the kind of work 
which you do or care about. 1 should like only to submit the problem 
to you. and then Pll have just two questions to ask you. I had to 
call on you, because it is a matter that involves someone's mind, a 
very great mind, and" —she spoke impersonally, in the manner of 
rendering exact justice— “and you arc the only great mind left in 
this field.” 

She could not tell why her words hit him as they did, She saw the 
stillness of his face, the sudden earnestness of the eyes, a strange 

329 



earnestness that seemed eager and almost pleading, then she heard 
his voice come gravely, as if from under the pressure of some emo- 
tion that made it sound simple and humble; 

u What is your problem. Miss Taggart?” 

She told him about the motor and the place where she had found 
it: she told him that it had proved impossible to learn the name of 
the inventor; she did not mention the details of her quest. She 
handed him photographs of the motor and the remnant of the 
manuscript. 

She watched him as he read. She saw the professional assurance 
in the swift, scanning motion of his eyes, at first, then the pause, 
then the growing intentness, then a movement of his lips which, from 
another man, would have been a whistle or a gasp. She saw him stop 
for long minutes and look off; as if his mind were racing over count* 
less sudden trails, trying to follow them alt— she saw him leaf back 
through the pages, then stop, then force himself to read on, as if he 
were torn between his eagerness to continue and his eagerness to 
seize all the possibilities breaking open before his vision. She saw 
his silent excitement, she knew that he had forgotten her office, her 
existence, everything but the sight of an achievement — and in tribute 
to his being capable of such reaction, she wished it were possible for 
her to like Dr Robert Stadler. 

They had been silent for over an hour, when he finished and 
looked up at her. “Rut this is extraordinary!” he said in the joyous, 
astonished tone of announcing some news she had not expected. 

She wished she could smile in answer and grant him the comrade- 
ship of a joy celebrated together, but she merely nodded and said 
coldly. “Yes ” 

“But, Miss Taggart, this is tremendous!” 

"Yes.” 

“Did you say it's a matter of technology? It's more, much, much 
more than # that. The pages where he writes about his eonvertei 
you can see what premise he’s speaking from. He arrived at some 
new concept of energy. He discarded all our standard assumptions, 
according to which his motor would have been impossible. He formu- 
lated a new premise of his own and he solved the secret of converting 
static energy into kinetic power. Do you know what that means? Do 
you realize what a feat of pure, abstract science he had to perform 
before he could make his motor?” 

“Who?” she asked quietly. 

“I beg your pardon?” 

“That was the first of the two questions l wanted to ask you. Dr. 
Stadler: can you think of any young scientist you might have known 
ten years ago. who would have been able to do this 7 ” 

He paused, astonished; he had not had time to wondet* about that 
question. “No,” he said slowly, frowning, “no, I cWt think of 
anyone. . . . And that’s odd . . . because an ability df this kind 
couldn’t have passed unnoticed anywhere . * . somebody Ifcvould have 
called him to my attention . . they always sent promising young 
physicists to me, . > . Did you say you found this in the research 
laboratory' of a plain, commercial motor factory?” 

330 



"Yes.” 

"That’s odd. Whal was he doing in such a place?” 

"Designing a motor.” 

“That’s what 1 mean. A man with the genius of a great scientist, 
who chose lo be a commercial inventor? 1 find it outrageous. He 
wanted a motor, and he quietly performed a major revolution in the 
science of energy, just as a means to an end, and he didn't bother 
to publish his findings, but went right on making his motor. Why did 
he want to waste his mind on practical appliances?” 

"Perhaps because he liked living on this earth.” she said invol- 
untarily. 

“I beg your pardon?” 

"No, l . . . I'm sorry. Dr Stadler. 1 did not intend to discuss 
any . . , irrelevant subject ” 

lie was looking off, pursuing his own course of thought. “Why 
didn't he come to me” Why wasn't he in some great scientific estab- 
lishment where he belonged? If he had the brains to achieve this, 
surely he had the brains to know the importance ol what he had 
done Why didn't he publish a paper on his definition of energy? 1 
can see the geneial direction he'd taken, but God damn him! — the 
most important pages aie missing, the statement isn't here! Surely 
somebody around him should have known enough to announce his 
work to the whole world of science. Why didn't they 7 How could 
iluv abandon, just abandon a thing of this kind?” 

’ These are the questions to which 1 lound no answers ” 

“And besides, from the puiely. practical aspeU, why was that 
motor left in a pink pile' >ou d think any greed) loot of an industri- 
alist would have giabbcd it m order to make a fortune. No. intelli- 
gence was needed to see ns commercial value.” 

She smiled foi the first time a smile uglv with bitterness: she 
said nothing 

“You tound it impossible to Pace the inventor 1 ” he asked 

'Completely impossible so tar.” 

Do you think that he is still alive?” 

1 have icason lo think that he is But I can’t be sure.” 

“Suppose l tried to advertise tor him?” 

"No. Don’t.” 

’ But, it I were to place ads in scientific publications and have Dr, 
Terns” -he stopped; he saw her glance at him as swiftly as he 
glanced at hei, she said nothing, but she held Ins glance; he looked 
away and finished the sentence coldly and firmly' “and have Dr. 
Terris broadcast on the radio that 1 wish to see him. would he refuse 
to come?” 

"Yes. Dr. Stadler, I think he would refuse.” 

He was not looking at her. She saw the faint tightening of his 
facial muscles and, simultaneously, the look of something going slack 
m the lines of his face; she could not tell what sort of light was dying 
within him nor what made her think of the death of a light. 

He tossed the manuscript down on the desk with a casual, con- 
temptuous movement of his wrist. 'Those men who do not mind 

331 



being practical enough to sell their brains for money, ought to ac- 
quire a little knowledge of the conditions of practical reality.” 

He looked at her with a touch of defiance, as if watting for an 
angry answer. But her answer was worse than anger: her face re- 
mained expressionless, as if the truth or falsehood of his convictions 
were of no concern to her any longer. She said politely, “The second 
question I wanted to ask you was whether you would be kind enough 
to tell me the name of any physicist you know who, in your judg- 
ment, would possess the ability to attempt the reconstruction of 
this motor.” 

He looked at her and chuckled: it was a sound of pain. “Have 
you been tortured by it, too. Miss Taggart? By the impossibility of 
finding any sort of intelligence anywhere?” 

‘T have interviewed some physicists who were highly recom- 
mended to me and i have found them to be hopeless.” 

He leaned forward eagerly. “Miss Taggart,” he asked, “did you 
call on me because you trusted the integrity of my scientific judg- 
ment?” The question was a naked pica. 

“Yes.” she answered evenly, “I trusted the integrity of your scien- 
tific judgment/' 

He leaned back; he looked as if some hidden smile were smoothing 
the tension away from his face. “J wish 1 could help you/' he said, 
as to a comrade. “I most selfishly wish 1 could help you. because, 
you see. this has been my hardest problem — trying to find men of 
talent for my own staff. Talent, hell! I'd be satisfied with just a 
semblance of promise — but the men they send me couldn't be hon- 
estly said to possess the potentiality of developing into decent garage 
mechanics. 1 don't know whether I am getting older and more de- 
manding, or Whether the human race is degenerating, but the world 
didn't seem to be so barren of intelligence in my youth. Today, if 
you saw the kind of men I've had to interview, you’d — ” 

He stopped abruptly, as if at a sudden recollection. He remained 
silent; he seemed to be considering something he knew, but did not 
wish to tell her; she became certain of it, when he concluded 
brusquely, in that tone of resentment which conceals an evasion, 
“No, 1 don't know anyone I’d care to recommend to you.” 

“This was all 1 wanted to ask you. Dr. Stadler.” she said. “Thank 
you for giving me your lime.” 

He sat silently still for a moment, as if he could not bring himsell 
to leave. 

“Miss Taggart,” he asked, “could you show me the actual motor 
itself?” 

She looked at him, astonished. “Why, yes ... if you wish. But it’s 
in an underground vault, down in our Terminal tunnels/' 

“1 don't mind, if you wouldn’t mind taking me down t|cre. 1 ha\e 
no special motive. It’s only my personal curiosity. 1 wijuld like to 
see it — that’s all.” 

When they stood in the granite vault, over a glass case containing 
a shape of broken metal, he Ux>k off his hat with a staw, absent 
movement-— and she could not tell whether it was the routine gesture 

332 



of remembering that he was in a room with a lady, or the gesture of 
baring one's head over a coffin. 

They stood in silence, in the glare of a single light refracted from 
the glass surface to their faces. Train wheels were clicking in the 
distance, and it seemed at times as it a sudden, sharper jolt of vibra- 
tion were about to awaken an answer from the corpse in the glass 
case. 

‘It's so wonderful," said Dr. Stadler, his voice tow. “It's so won- 
derful to see a great, new, crucial idea which is not mine!" 

She looked at him, wishing she could believe that she understood 
him correctly. He spoke, in passionate sincerity, discarding conven- 
tion. discarding concern for whether it was proper to let her hear 
the confession of his pain, seeing nothing but the face of a woman 
who was able to understand: 

“Miss Taggart, do you know the hallmark of the second-rater? ft’s 
resentment of another man's achievement. 1 hose touchy mediocrities 
who sit trembling lest someone’s work prove greater than their 
own- -they have no inkling of the loneliness that comes when you 
reach the top. The loneliness for an equal —for a mind to respect 
and an achievement to admire They bare their teeth at you from 
out of their rat holes, thinking that you take pleasure in letting your 
brilliance dim them —while you'd give a year of your life to see a 
flicker of talent anywhere among them. They envy achievement, and 
their dream of greatness is a world where all men have become their 
acknowledged inferiors They don't know that that dream is the infalli- 
ble proof ot mediocrity, because that sort of world is what the man of 
achievement would not be able to bear. 1 bey have no way of know- 
ing what he feels when surrounded by inferiors- hatred? no, not 
hatred, but boredom— the terrible, hopeless, draining, paralyzing 
boredom. Of what account are praise and adulation from men whom 
you don't respect? Have you ever felt the longing for someone you 
could admire? For something, not to took down at, but up to?" 

“I’ve fe*t it all my life," she said. It was an answer she could not 
refuse him. 

“I know," he said- and there was beauty in the impersonal gentle- 
ness of lus voice - i knew it the first time 1 spoke to you. That w^as 
why 1 came today--" He stopped for the briefest instant, but she 
did not answer the appeal and he finished with the same quiet gentle- 
ness. “Well, that was why I wanted to see the motor " 

“I understand," she said softly; the tone of her voice was the only 
torm of acknowledgment she could grant him 

“Miss Taggait," he said, his eyes lowered, looking at the glass ease, 

l know a man who might be able to undertake the reconstruction of 
that motor. He would not work for me -so he is probably the kind 
ot man you want." 

But by the time he raised his head — and before he saw the look 
of admiration in her eyes, the open look he had begged for, the 
look of forgiveness— he destroyed his single moment’s atonement by 
adding in a voice of drawing-room sarcasm, “Apparently, the young 
man Had no desire to work for the good of society or the welfare 
of science. He told me that he would not take a government job. I 

333 



presume he wanted the bigger salary he could hope to obtain from 
a private employer/’ 

He turned away, not to see the look that was fading from her 
face, not to let himself know its meaning. “Yes," she said, her voice 
hard, “he is probably the kind of man l want." 

“He’s a young physicist from the Utah Institute of Technology/' 
he said dryly. “His name is Quentin Daniels. A friend of mine sent 
him to me a few months ago. He came to see me, but he would not 
take the job 1 offered. I wanted him on my staff. He had the mind 
of a scientist. I don't know whether he can succeed with your motor, 
but at least he has the ability to attempt it. I believe you can still 
reach him at the Utah Institute of Technology. I don't know what 
he’s doing there now — they closed the Institute a year ago/’ 

“Thank you. Dr. Stadler. 1 shall get in touch with him.” 

“If ... if you want me to. 111 be glad to help him with the 
theoretical part of it. I'm going to do some work myself, starting 
from the leads of that manuscript. I’d like to find the cardinal secret 
of energy that its author had found. It's his basic principle that we 
must discover. If we succeed, Mr. Daniels may finish the job. as fai 
as your motor is concerned/’ 

“I will appreciate any help you may care to give me, Dr. Stadler/' 

’They walked silently through the dead tunnels of the Terminal, 
down the ties of a rusted track under a string of blue lights, to the 
distant glow of the platforms. 

At the mouth of the tunnel, they saw a man kneeling on the 
track, hammering at a switch with the unrhythmical exasperation of 
uncertainty. Another man stood watching him impatiently. 

“Well, what’s the matter with the damn thing' 1 ’* asked the watcher. 

“Don't know/’ 

“You’ve been at it for an hour “ 

“Yeah/* 

“How long is it going to take? ’ 

“Who is John Galt?” 

Dr. Stadler winced. They had gone past the men, when he said, 
“I don't like that expiession." 

“1 don't, either/' she answered. 

“Where did it come from? ’ 

“Nobody knows ’’ 

They were silent, then he said, “l knew a John Cialt once. Only 
he died long ago.” 

“Who was he?" 

“1 used to think that he was still alive. But now I'm certain that 
he must have died. He had such a mind that, had he lived, the whole 
world would have been talking of him by now/’ 

“But the whole world tv talking of him/' 

He stopped still. “Yes . . /* he said slowly, staring atf a thought 
that had never struck him before, “yes . . . Why?" Th*i word was 
heavy with the sound of terror. 

“Who was he, Dr. Stadler?” 

“Why are they talking of him?” 

“Who was he?” 


334 



He shook his head with a shudder and said sharply, “It's just a 
coincidence. The name is not uncommon at all. It’s a meaningless 
coincidence. It has no connection with the man t knew. That man 
is dead.” 

He did not permit himself to know the full meaning of the words 
he added: 

“He has to be dead.” 

* * 

Ihe order that lay on his desk was marked 'Confidential . . . 
Emergency . . Priority . . . Essential need certified by office of I'op 
Co-ordinator . . . for the account of Project X” — and demanded that 
he sell ten thousand tons of Rearden Metal to the State Science 
Institute 

Rcarden read it and glanced up at the superintendent of his mills 
who stood before him without moving. The superintendent had come 
in and put the order down on his desk without a word. 

“1 thought you'd want to see it,” he said, in answer to Rear- 
den’s glance. 

Reardon pressed a button, summoning Miss Ives. He handed the 
order to her and s:ud T “Send this back to wherever it came from. 
Tel) them that 1 will not sell any Rearden Metal to the State Sci- 
ence Institute.” 

Gwen Ives and the superintendent looked at him. at each other 
and back at him again, what he saw in their eyes was congratulation. 

"Yes, Mr Rearden,” Gwen Ives said formally, taking the slip as 
if it were any other kind of business paper She bowed and left the 
room. I he superintendent followed. 

Rearden smiled faintly, in greeting to what they felt. He felt noth- 
ing about that paper or its possible consequences. 

By a sort of inner convulsion— which had been like tearing a plug 
out to cut off the current of his emotions — he had told himself six 
months ago. Act first, keep the mills going, feel later, it had made 
him able to watch dispassionately the working of the Fair Share Law. 

Nobody had known how that law was to be observed. First, he 
had been told that he could not priKluce Rearden Metal in an 
amount greater than the tonnage of the best special alloy, other than 
steel, produced by Orren Boyle But Orren Boyle's best special alloy 
was some cracking mixture that no one cared to buy. Then he had 
been told that he could produce Rcarden Metal in the amount that 
Orren Boyle could have produced, if he could have produced it. 
Nobody had known how this was to be determined. Somebody in 
Washington had announced a figure, naming a number of tons per 
year, giving no reasons. Everybody had lei it go at that 

He had not known how to give every consumer who demanded it 
an equal share of Rcarden Metal. The waiting list of orders could 
not be filled in three years, even had he been permitted to work at 
full capacity. New orders were coming in daily. They were not orders 
imy longer, in the old. honorable sense of trade; they were demands. 
The law provided that he could be sued by any consumer who failed 
to receive his fair share of Rearden Metal. 

Nobody had known how to determine what constituted a fair share 

335 



of what amount. Then a bright young boy just out of college had 
been sent to him from Washington, as Deputy Director of Distribu- 
tion. After many telephone conferences with the capital, the boy 
announced that customers would gel five hundred tons of the Metal 
each, in the order of the dates of their applications. Nobody had 
argued against his figure. There was no way to form an argument; 
the figure could have been one pound or one million tons, with the 
same validity. The boy had established an office at the Reardcn mills, 
where four girls took applications for shares of Reardcn Metal. At 
the present rate of the mills’ production, the applications extended 
well into the next century. 

Five hundred tons of Rearden Metal could not provide three miles 
of rail for Taggart Transcontinental: it could not provide the bracing 
for one of Ken Danagger’s coal mines. The largest industries. Rear- 
den's best customers, were denied the use of his Metal. But golf clubs 
made of Rearden Metal were suddenly appearing on the market, as 
well as coffee pots, garden tools and bathroom faucets. Ken Danag- 
ger, who had seen the value of the Metal and had dared to order it 
against a fury of public opinion, was not permitted to obtain it: his 
order had been left unfilled, cut off without warning hv the new 
laws. Mr. Mowen, who had betrayed Taggart Transcontinental in its 
most dangerous hour, was now making switches of Rearden Metal 
and selling them to the Atlantic Southern. Rearden looked on, his 
emotions plugged out. 

He turned away, without a word, when anybody mentioned to him 
what everybody knew; the quick fortunes that were being made on 
Rearden Metal. “Well, no," people said in drawing rooms, “you 
mustn’t call it black market, because it isn’t, really. Nobody is selling 
the Metal illegally. They’re just selling their right to it. Not selling 
really, just pooling their shares.” He did not want to know the insect 
intricacy of the deals, through which the “shares” were sold and 
pooled — nor how a manufacturer in Virginia had produced, in two 
months, five thousand tons of castings made of Rearden Metal — nor 
what man in Washington was that manufacturer’s unlisted partner. 
He knew that their profit on a ton of Rearden Metal was five times 
larger than his own. He said nothing. Everybody had a right to the 
Metal, except himself. 

The young boy from Washington — whom the steel workers had 
nicknamed the Wet Nurse — hung around Rearden with a primitive, 
astonished curiosity which, incredibly, was a form of admiration. 
Rearden watched him with disgusted amusement. The boy had no 
inkling of any concept of morality: it had been bred out of him by 
his college; this had left him an odd frankness, naive and cynical at 
once, like the innocence of a savage. 

“You despise me, Mr. Rearden,” he had declared once* suddenly 
and without any resentment. “That’s impractical.” 

“Why is it impractical?” Rearden had asked. 

The boy had looked puzzled and had found no answer He never 
had an answer to any “why?” He spoke in flat assertions; He would 
say about people, “He's old-fashioned,” “He's unreconstructed,” 
”He*s unadjusted ” without hesitation or explanation; he [would also 

336 



say, while being a graduate in metallurgy, “Iron smelting, I think, 
seems to require a high temperature/’ He uttered nothing but uncer- 
tain opinions about physical nature- - and nothing but categorical im- 
pel atives about men. 

“Mi Rearden/' he had said once, “if you feel you’d like to hand 
out more of the Metal to Iriends of yours I mean, in bigger hauls — 
it could be at ranged, you know. Why don’t we apply for a special 
permission on the ground of essential need? I’ve got a few friends 
in Washington Your Iriends arc pretty important people, big busi- 
nessmen. \o it wouldn’t be difficult to get away with the essential 
need dodge. Of course, there would be a tew/ expenses For things in 
Washington. You know how it is. things always occasion expenses.” 

“What tilings?” 

'You understand what 1 mean.” 

“No.” Rearden had said, ”1 don’t Why don’t you explain it to 
me?” 

The boy had looked at him uncertainly, weighed it in his mind, 
then come out with: “It's bad psychology/’ 

“What is*’ 

“You know. Mr. Rearden, it's not necessary to use such words 
as that.” 

“As what } " 

“Words are relative. They're only symbols. If we don’t use uglv 
symbols, we won't have any ugliness. Why do you want me to say 
things one wav, when I've already said them another*'” 

“Which wav do I want you to say them’ 1 ” 

“Why do you want me to?” 

“Foi the simo reason that you don't. ' 

The boy had remained silent for a moment, then had said, “You 
know. Mi. Rearden, there are no absolute standards. We can’t go 
hv rigid principles, we’ve got to be flexible, we've got to adjust to 
the reality of the dnv and act on the expediency of the moment/' 

“Run along, punk (io and try to pour a ton ot steel without rigid 
principles, on the expediency of the moment/* 

A strange sense, which was almost a sense ot style, made Rearden 
feel contempt lor the bov. but no resentment. The boy seemed to 
Ot the spirit of the events around them. It was as if they were being 
carried back across a tong span of centuries to the age where the 
boy had belonged, but he. Rearden, had not instead of building new 
furnaces, thought Rearden, he was now running a losing race to keep 
the old ones going; instead of starting new ventures, new research, 
new experiments in the use of Rearden Metal, he w*as spending the 
whole of his energy on a quest for sources of iron ore: like the men 
at the dawn of the Iron Age —he thought— but with less hope. 

He tried to avoid these thoughts. He had to stand on guard against 
his own feeling- -as if some part of him had become a stranger that 
had to be kept numb, and his will had to be its constant, watchful 
a aesthetic. That part was an unknown ot which he knew only that 
he must never see its root and never give it voice. He had lived 
through one dangerous moment which he could not allow to return. 

It was the moment when — alone in his office, on a winter evening, 

337 



held paralyzed by a newspaper spread on his desk with a long column 
of directives on the front page — he had heard on the radio the news 
of EUis Wyatt’s flaming oil fields. Then, his first reaction— before 
any thought of the future, any sense of disaster, any shock, terror 
or protest — had been to burst out laughing. He had laughed in tri- 
umph, in deliverance, in a spurting, living exultation— and the words 
which he had not pronounced, but felt, were: God bless you. Elhs, 
whatever you're doing! 

When he had grasped the implications of his laughter, he had 
known that he was now condemned to constant vigilance against 
himself. Like the survivor of a heart attack, he knew that he had 
had a warning and that he carried within him a danger that could 
strike him at any moment. 

He had held it off, since then. He had kept an even, cautious, 
severely controlled pace in his inner steps. But it had come close to 
him for a moment, once again. When he had looked at the order of 
the State Science Institute on his desk, it had seemed to him that 
the glow moving over the paper did not come from the furnaces 
outside, but from the flames of a burning oil field. 

“Mr Rearden.” said the Wet Nurse, when he heard about the 
rejected order, “you shouldn't have done that.” 

“Why not?” 

“There’s going to be trouble.** 

“What kind of trouble?” 

“It’s a government order. You can't reject a government order.” 

“Why can’t 1?” 

“it's an Essential Need project, and secret, too It's vets impor- 
tant” 

“What kind of a project is it?” 

“1 don't know It’s secret ” 

“Then how do you know it's important?” 

“It said so.” 

“Who said so?” 

“You can t doubt such a thing as that, Mr. Rearden!” 

“Why can’t I?” 

“But you ain’t.” 

“If 1 can’t, then that would make it an absolute and you said there 
aren’t any absolutes.” 

“That’s different.” 

“How is it different?” 

“It’s the government.” 

“You mean, there aren't any absolutes except the government?” 

“I mean, if they say it’s important, then it is.” 

“Why?” 

“I don’t want you to get in trouble, Mr. Rearden. and $ou re going 
to, sure as hell. You ask too many why's. Now why do y<fu do that?” 

Rearden glanced at him and chuckled. The boy noti<|ed his own 
words and grinned sheepishly, but he looked unhappy. 

The man who came to see Rearden a week later wjSs youngish 
and slenderish, but neither as young nor as slender as -he tried to 
make himself appear. He wore civilian clothes and the feather leg- 

338 



gings of a traffic cop. Rearden could not quite get it clear whether 
he came from the State Science Institute or from Washington. 

“I understand that you refused to sell metal to the State Science 
Institute, Mr. Rearden,” he said in a soft, confidential lone of voice. 

“That’s right,” said Rearden. 

“But wouldn’t that constitute a willful disobedience of the law?” 

“It s for you to interpret.” 

‘May 1 ask your reason?” 

“My reason is of no interest to you.” 

“Oh. but of course it is! We are not your enemies, Mr. Rearden. 
We want to be fair to you. You mustn’t be afraid of the fact that 
you are a big industrialist. We won’t hold it against you. We actually 
want to be as fair to you as to the lowest day laborer. We would 
like to know your reason ” 

“Print my refusal in the newspapers, and any reader will tell you 
my reason. It appeared in all the newspapets a little over a year ago.” 

“Oh, no. no, no! Why talk oi newspapers? Can t we settle this as 
a friendly, private matter?” 

‘That's up to you.” 

“We don't want this in the newspapers “ 

“No?” 

“No. We wouldn’t want to hurt you.” 

Rearden glanced at him and asked, “Why does the State Science 
institute need ten thousand tons ot metal” What is Project X?” 

“Oh, that” It’s a very important project of scientific research, an 
undertaking of great social value that may prove of inestimable pub- 
lie benefit, but. unfortunately, the regulations ol top policy do not 
permit me to tell vou ns nature m fuller detail.” 

“You know,” said Rearden, “1 could tell you —as my reason -that 
I do not wish to sell my Metal to those whose purpose is kept secret 
horn me I created that Metal. It is my moral rcsjx'nsibility to know 
lor what put pose l permit it to be used ” 

“Oh, but you don't have to worry about that. Mr. Rearden! We 
teheve vou of the responsibility. ” 

“Suppose I don't wish to be relieved of it”” 

“But . . hut that is an old-fashioned and . . . and purely theoreti- 
cal attitude.” 

T said l could name it as my reason. But 1 won’t- - because, in 
tins case. I have another, inclusive reason l would not sell any Rear- 
den Metal to the State Science Institute tor any purpose whatever, 
good or bad, secret or open.” 

Bui why”” 

“Listen,” said Rearden slowly, “there might he some sort of justi- 
fication tor the savage societies in which a man had to expect that 
enemies could murder him at any moment and had to defend himself 
as best he could. But there can be no justification for a society it* 
which a man is expected to manufacture the weapons for his own 
murderers.” 

T don’t think it's advisable to use such words. Mr. Rearden. I 
don’t think it’s practical to think in such terms. After all, the 
government cannot— -in the pursuit of wide, national policies— take 



purpose but his own pleasure?” he asked, “This is the way I want 
you to wear it. Only for me. I like to look at it. It's beautiful." 

She laughed; it was a soft, low, breathless sound. She could not 
speak or move, only nod silently in acceptance and obedience; she 
nodded several times, her hair swaying with the wide, circular move- 
ment of her head, then hanging still as she kept her head bowed 
to him. 

She dropped down on the bed. She lay stretched lazily, her head 
thrown back, her arms at her sides, palms pressed to the rough tex- 
ture of the bedspread, one leg bent, the long line of the other ex- 
tended across the dark blue linen of the spread, the stone glowing 
like a wound in the semi-darkness, throwing a star of rays against 
her skin. 

Her eyes were half-closed in the mocking, conscious triumph of 
being admired, but her mouth was half-open in helpless, begging 
expectation. He stood across the room, looking at her, at her Hat 
stomach drawn in, as her breath was drawn, at the sensitive body of 
a sensitive consciousness. He said, his voice low, intent and oddly 
quiet: 

"Dagny, if some artist painted you as you are now. men would 
come to look at the painting to experience a moment that nothing 
could give them in their own lives. They would call it great art. They 
would not know the nature of what they felt, but the painting would 
show them everything — even that you’re not some classical Venus, 
but the Vice-President of a railroad, because that’s part of u- even 
what I am, because that’s part of it. too. Dagnv, they’d feel it and 
go away and sleep with the first barmaid in sight — and they’d never 
try to reach what they had felt. I wouldn’t want to seek it from a 
painting. I’d "want it real. I'd take no pride in any hopeless longing. 
I wouldn’t hold a stillborn aspiration. I'd want to have it, to make 
it, to live it. Do you understand?" 

"Oh yet* Hank, / understand!” she said. Do you, my darling? — 
do you understand it fully? — she thought, but did not say it aloud. 

On the evening oi a blizzard, she came home to find an enormous 
spread of tropical flowets standing in her living room against the 
dark glass of windows battered by snowflakes. They were stems of 
Hawaiian Torch Ginger, three feet tall, their large heads were cones 
of petals that had the sensual texture of soft leather and the color 
of blood. "I saw them in a florist’s window,” he told her when he 
came, that night, "I liked seeing them through a blizzard. But there’s 
nothing as wasted as an object in a public window." 

She began to find flowers in her apartment at unpredictable times, 
flowers sent without a card, but with the signature of the sender in 
their fantastic shapes, in the violent colors, in the extravagant cost. 
He brought her a gold necklace made of small hinged squares that 
formed a spread of solid gold to cover her neck and shbulders. like 
the color of a knight’s armor— "Wear it with a blacg dress,” he 
ordered. He brought her a set of glasses that w'ere tall, slander blocks 
of square-cut crystal, made by a famous jeweler. She patched the 
way he held one of the glasses when she served him a drink— as if 
the touch of the texture under his fingers, the taste of the drink and 

342 



the sight of her face were the single form of an indivisible moment 
of enjoyment. “I used to see things I liked," he said, “but I never 
bought them. There didn’t seem to be much meaning in it. There 
is, now." 

He telephoned her at the office, one winter morning, and said, not 
in the tone of an invitation, but in the tone of an executive’s order. 
"We’re going to have dinner together tonight. I want you to dress. 
Do you have any sort of blue evening gown? Wear it." 

The dress she wore was a slender tunic of dusty blue that gave 
her a look of unprotected simplicity, the look of a statue in the blue 
shadows of a gaidcn under the summer sun. What he brought and 
put over her shoulders was a cape oi blue fox that swallowed her 
from the curve of her chin to the tips of her sandals. “Hank, that’s 
preposterous" — she laughed — "it's not my kind of thing?" “No?” he 
asked, drawing her to a mirror. 

The huge blanket of fur made her look like a child bundled for a 
snowstorm: the luxurious texture transformed the innocence of the 
awkward bundle into the elegance of a perversely intentional con- 
trast: into a look of stressed sensuality. The fur was a soft brown, 
dimmed hy an aura of blue that could not be seen, only felt like an 
enveloping mist, like a suggestion of color grasped not by one's eyes 
but hv one’s hands, as if one felt, without contact, the sensation of 
sinking one's palms into the fur’s softness. The cape left nothing to 
be seen of hei, except the brown of her hair, the blue-gray of her 
eyes, the shape of her mouth 

She turned to him. her smile startled and helpless. "1 ... 1 didn't 
know it would look like that." 

“I did." 

She sat beside him m his air as he drove through the dark streets 
of the city. A sparkling net oi snow flashed into sight once m a 
while, when they went past the lights on the corners. She did not 
ask where they were going She sat low in the seat, leaning back, 
looking up at the snowflakes. Hie fur cape was wrapped tightly about 
her, within it, her dress felt as light as a nightgown and the feel of 
the cape was like an embrace. 

She looked at the angular tiers of lights rising through the snowy 
curtain, and -glancing at him, at the grip of his gloved hands on the 
wheel, at the austere, fastidious elegance of the figure in black over- 
coat and white muffler -she thought that he belonged in a great city, 
among polished sidewalks and sculptured stone. 

The car went down into a tunnel, streaked through an echoing 
tube of tile under the river and rose to the coils of an elevated 
highway under an open black sky. The fights were below them now, 
spread in fiat miles of bluish windows, of smokestacks, slanting 
cranes, red gusts of fire, and long, dim rays silhouetting the contorted 
shapes of an industrial district. She thought that she had seen him 
once, at his mills, with smudges of soot on his forehead, dressed m 
acid-eaten overalls: he had worn them as naturally well as he wore 
his formal clothes. He belonged here, too— she thought, looking 
down at the flats of New Jersey— among the cranes, the fires and 
the grinding clatter of gears. 


343 



When they sped down a dark road through an empty countryside, 
with the strands of snow glittering across their headlights — she re- 
membered how he had looked in the summer of their vacation, 
dressed in slacks, stretched on the ground of a lonely ravine, with 
the grass under his body and the sun on his bare arms. He belonged 
in the countryside, she thought — he belonged everywhere — he was a 
man who belonged on earth — and then she thought of the words 
which were more exact: he was a man to whom the earth belonged, 
the man at home on earth and in control. Why, then — she won- 
dered — should he have had to carry a burden of tragedy which, in 
silent endurance, he had accepted so completely that he had barely 
known he carried it? She knew part of the answer; she felt as if the 
whole answer were close and she would grasp it on some ap- 
proaching day. But she did not want to think of it now, because they 
were moving away from the burdens, because within the space of a 
speeding car they held the stillness of full happiness. She moved her 
head imperceptibly to let it touch his shoulder for a moment. 

The car left the highway and turned toward the lighted squares of 
distant windows, that hung above the snow beyond a grillwork of 
bare branches. Then, in a soft, dim light, they sat at a table by a 
window facing darkness and trees. The inn stood on a knoll in the 
woods; it had the luxury of high cost and privacy, and an air of 
beautiful taste suggesting that it had not been discovered by those 
who sought high cost and notice. She was barely aware of the dining 
room: it blended away into a sense of superlative comfort, and the 
only ornament that caught her attention was the glitter of iced 
branches beyond the glass of the window. 

She sat, looking out, the blue fur half-slipping off her naked arms 
and shoulders. He watched her through narrowed eyes, with the 
satisfaction of a man studying his own workmanship. 

“I like giving things to you,” he said, “because you don't need 
them.” 

“No?” 

“And it’s not that I want you to have them. I want you to have 
them from me. " 

“That is the way I do need them. Hank. From you.” 

“Do you understand that it’s nothing but vicious self-indulgence 
on my part? I’m not doing it for your pleasure, but for mine.” 

“Hank!” The cry was involuntary; it held amusement, despair, 
indignation and pity, “if you’d given me those things just for my 
pleasure, not yours, I would have thrown them in your lace.” 

“Yes . . . Yes, then you would — and should.” 

“Did you call it your vicious self-indulgence?” 

“That’s what they call it.” 

“Oh, yes! That’s what they call it. What do you call it, |fank ?” 

“I don’t know,” he said indifferently, and went on intently. “1 
know only that if it's vicious, then let me be damned for it, but that’s 
what I want to do more than anything else on earth.” 

She did not answer; she sat looking straight at him with a faint 
smile, as if asking him to listen to the meaning of his own; words. 

“Fve always wanted to enjoy my wealth,” he said. “I didn’t know 

344 



how to do it. 1 didn’t even have time to know how much I wanted 
to. But I knew that all the steel I poured came back to me as liquid 
gold, and the gold was meant to harden into any shape I wished, and 
it was 1 who had to enjoy it. Only I couldn’t. 1 couldn’t find any purpose 
for it. I’ve found it, now. It’s I who’vc produced that wealth and it’s 
I who am going to let it buy for me every kind of pleasure l want — 
including the pleasure of seeing how much I’m able to pay for — 
including the preposterous feat of turning you into a luxury object.” 

“But I’m a luxury object that you’ve paid for long ago,” she said; 
she was not smiling. 

“How?” 

“By means of the same values with which you paid for your mills.” 

She did not know whether he understood it with that full, luminous 
finality which is a thought named in words; but she knew that what 
he felt in that moment was understanding: She saw the relaxation of 
an invisible smile in his eyes. 

“I’ve never despised luxury,” he said, “yet I've always despised 
those who enjoyed it. I looked at what they called their pleasures 
and it seemed so miserably senseless to me — after what 1 fell at the 
mills. I used to watch steel being poured, tons of liquid steel running 
as I wanted it to, where 1 wanted it. And then I’d go to a banquet 
and I’d see people who sat trembling in awe before their own gold 
dishes and lace tablecloths, as if their dining room were the master 
and they were just objects serving it. objects created by their dia- 
mond shirt studs and necklaces, not the other way around. Then I’d 
run to the site of the first slag heap I could find — and they’d say 
that 1 didn't know how to enjoy life, because I cared for nothing 
but business.*’ 

He looked at the dim, sculptured beauty of the room and at the 
people who sat at the tables. They sat in a manner of self-conscious 
display, as if the enormous cost of their clothes and the enormous 
care of their grooming should have fused into splendor, but didn’t. 
Their faces had a look of rancorous anxiety. 

“Dagny. look at those people. They're supposed to be the playboys 
of life; the amusement -seekers and luxury-lovers. They sit theie, 
waiting for this place to give them meaning, not the other way 
around. But they’re always shown to us as the enjovers of material 
pleasures- and then we’re taught that enjoyment of material plea- 
sures is evil. Enjoyment? Are they enjoying it? Is there some sort 
of perversion in what we're taught, some error that’s vicious and 
very important?” 

“Yes, Hank— very vicious and very, very important.” 

“They are the playboys, while we’re just tradesmen, you and 1. 
Do you realize that we’re much more capable of enjoying this place 
than they can ever hope to be?” 

“Yes,” 

He said slowly, in the tone of a quotation, “Why have we left it 
all to fools? It should have been ours.” She looked at him, startled. 
He smiled. “I remember every word you said to me at that party, I 
didn't answer you then, because the only answer l had, the only 
thing your words meant to me, was an answer that you would hate 

345 



me for, I thought: it was that I wanted you." He looked at her: 
"Dagny, you didn’t intend it then, but what you were saying was 
that you wanted to sleep with me, wasn’t it?” 

"Yes. Hank. Of course." 

He held her eyes, then looked away, They were silent for a long 
time. He glanced at the soft twilight around them, then at the sparkle 
of two wine glasses on their table. "Dagny, in my youth, when I was 
working in the ore mines in Minnesota, 1 thought that I wanted to 
reach an evening like this. No, that was not what 1 was working for, 
and I didn’t think of it often. But once in a while, on a winter night, 
when the stars were out and it was very cold, when 1 was tired, 
because 1 had worked two shifts, and wanted nothing on earth except 
to he down and fall asleep right there, on the mine ledge-- 1 thought 
that some day I would sit m a place like this, where one drink ot 
wine would cost more than my day's wages, and i would have earned 
the price of every minute of it and of every drop and of every flower 
on the table, and l would sit there tor no purpose but my own 
amusement." 

She asked, smiling. "With your mistress?" 

She saw the shot of pain in his eyes and wished desperately that 
she had not said it. 

"With ... a woman," he answered. She knew the word he had 
not pronounced. He went on. his voice soft and steady: "When l 
became rich and saw what the rich did for their amusement. I 
thought that the place 1 had imagined, did not exist. I had not even 
imagined it too clearly. I did not know what it would he like, only 
what I would feel. I gave up expecting it years ago. But- I feel 
it tonight." 

He raised his glass, looking at her. 

"Hank, I . . . I'd give up anything I’ve ever had in mv life, except 
my being a ... a luxury object of youi amusement." 

He saw her hand trembling as she held her glass. He said evenly, 
"l know it, dearest." 

She sat shocked and still: he had never used that woid before. He 
threw his head back and smiled the most brilliantly gay smile she 
had ever seen on his face. 

"Your first moment of weakness, Dagny," he said. 

She laughed and shook her head. He stretched his arm across the 
table and closed his hand over her naked shoulder, as if giving her 
an instant s support. Laughing softly, and as if by accident, she let 
her mouth brush against his fingers; it kept her face down for the 
one moment when he could have seen the brilliance of her eyes 
was tears. 

When she looked up at him, her smile matched his — and the rest 
of the evening was their celebration— for all his years since the nights 
on the mine ledges — for all her years since the night of her jrst ball 
when, in desolate longing for an uncaptured vision of gaiety, tehe had 
wondered about the people who expected the lights and ihef flowers 
to make them brilliant 

"Isn't there ... in what we’re taught . . . some error that’$ vicious 
and very important?" She thought of his words, as she lay in an 

346 



armchair of her living room, on a dismal evening of spring, waiting 
for him to come. . . . Just a little farther, my darling — she thought — 
look a little farther and you’ll be free of that error and of all the 
wasted pain you never should have had to carry. . . . But she felt 
that she, too, had not seen the whole of the distance, and she worn 
dered what were the steps left for her to discover. . . . 

Walking through the darkness of the streets, on his way to her 
apartment, Rearden kept his hands in his coat pockets and his arms 
pressed to his sides, because he felt that he did not want to touch 
anything or brush against anyone. He had never experienced it be- 
fore — this sense of revulsion that was not aroused by any particular 
object, but seemed to flood everything around him, making the city 
seem sodden. He could understand disgust for any one thing, and 
he could fight that thing with the healthy indignation of knowing 
that it did not belong in the world; but this was new to him — this 
feeling that the world was a loathsome place where he did not want 
to belong. 

He had held a conference with the producers of copper, who had 
just been garroted by a set of directives that would put them out of 
existence in another year. He had had no advice to give them, no 
solution to offer; his ingenuity, which had made him famous as the 
man who would always find a way to keep production going, had 
not been able to discover a way to save them. But they had all 
known that there was no way; ingenuity was a virtue of the mind— 
and in the issue confionting them, the mind had been discarded as 
irrelevant long ago "it’s a deal between the boys in Washington 
and the importers of copper,'* one of the men had said, “mainly 
d’ Anconia Copper,*’ 

This was only a small, extraneous stab of pain, he thought, a feel- 
ing of disappointment ijj, an expectation he had never had the right 
to expect; he should have known that this was just what a man like 
Francisco d’Anconia would do — and he wondered angrily why he 
telt as if a bright, brief flame had died somewhere in a lightless world. 

He diil not know whether the impossibility of acting had given 
him this sense of loathing, or whether the loathing had made him 
lose the desire to act. It's both, he thought; a desire presupposes the 
possibility of action to achieve it; action presupposes a goal wrtiich is 
worth achieving. If the only goal possible was to wheedle a precari- 
ous moment’s favor from men who held guns, then neither action 
nor desire could exist any longer. 

Then could life?-— he asked himself indifferently. 1 ife, he thought, 
had been defined as motion; man’s life was purposeful motion; what 
was the state of a being to whom purpose and motion were denied, 
a being held in chains but left to breathe and to see all the magnifi- 
cence of the possibilities he could have reached, left to scream 
'Why?*' and to be shown the muzzle of a gun as sole explanation? 
I le shrugged, walking on; he did not care even to find an answer. 

He observed, indifferently, lhe devastation wrought by his own 
indifference. No matter how hard a struggle he had lived through in 
the past, he had never reached the ultimate ugtiness of abandoning 
the will to act. In moments of suffering, he had never let pain win 

Ml 



its one permanent victory; he had never allowed it to make him lose 
the desire for joy. He had never doubted the nature of the world or 
man’s greatness as its motive power and its core. Years ago, he had 
wondered with contemptuous incredulity about the fanatical sects 
that appeared among men in the dark corners of history, the sects 
who believed that man was trapped in a malevolent universe ruled 
by evil for the sole purpose of his torture. Tonight, he knew what 
their vision of the world and their feel of it had been. If what he 
now saw around him was the world in which he lived, then he did 
not want to touch any part of it. ho did not want to fight it, he was 
an outsider with nothing at stake and no concern for remaining alive 
much longer. 

Dagny and his wish to see her were the only exception left to him. 
The wish remained. But in a sudden shock, he realized that he felt 
no desire to sleep with her tonight. That desire— which had never 
given him a moment’s rest, which had been growing, feeding on its 
own satisfaction — was wiped out. It was an odd impotence, neither 
of his mind nor of his body. He felt, as passionately as he had ever 
felt it, (hat she was the most desirable woman on earth; but what 
came from it was only a desire to desire het, a wish to feel, not a 
feeling. The sense of numbness seemed impersonal, as if its root 
were neither in him nor in her; as if it were the act of sex that now 
belonged to a realm which he had left. 

‘"Don’t get up — stay there- -it’s so obvious that you’ve been wait- 
ing for me that 1 want to look at it longer ’’ 

He said it, from the doorway of her apartment, seeing her 
stretched in an armchair, seeing the eager little jolt that threw her 
shoulders forward as she was about to rise; he was smiling. 

He noted -as if some part of him were watching his icactions with 
detached curiosity— that his smile and his sudden sense of gaiety 
were real. He grasped a feeling that he had always experienced, but 
never identified because it had always been absolute and immediate 
a feeling that forbade him ever to face her in pam. It was much 
more than the pride of wishing to conceal his suffering: it was the 
feeling that suffering must not be granted recognition in her pies- 
ence, that no form of claim between them should ever be motivated 
by pain and aimed at pity. It was not pity that he brought here or 
came here to find. 

“Do you still need proof that I’m always waiting for you?” she 
asked, leaning obediently back in her chair, her voice was neither 
tender nor pleading, but bright and mocking. 

“Dagny, why is it that most women would never admit that, hut 
you do?” 

“Because they’re never sure that they ought to be wanted. I am.” 

“I do admire self-confidence.” [ 

“Self-confidence was only one part of what I said. Hank.” 

“What’s the whole?” ; 

“Confidence of my value — and yours.” He glanced at 'her as if 
catching the spark of a sudden thought, and she laughed adding. “1 
wouldn’t be sure of holding a man like Orren Boyle, for' instance. 
He wouldn’t want me at all. You would.” 

348 



“Are you saying/’ he asked slowly* “that l rose in your estimation 
when you found that I wanted you?” 

“Of course.” 

“That’s not the reaction of most people of being wanted.” 

“It isn’t.” 

“Most people feel that they rise in their own eyes, if others 
want them.” 

“I feel that others live up to me, if they want me. And that is 
the way you feel, too, Hank, about yourself — whether you admit it 
or not,” 

That’s not what I said to you then, on that first morning — he 
thought, looking down at her. She lay stretched out lazily, her face 
blank, but her eyes bright with amusement. He knew that she was 
thinking of it and that she knew' he was. He smiled, but said noth- 
ing else. 

As he sat half-stretched on the couch, watching her across the 
room, he felt at peace — as if some temporary wall had risen between 
him and the things he had fell on his way here. He told her about 
his encounter with the man from the State Science Institute, because, 
even though he knew that the event held danger, an odd, glowing 
sense of satisfaction still remained from it in his mind. 

He chuckled at her look of indignation. "Don’t bother being angry 
at them.” he said. “It’s no worse than all the rest of what they’re 
doing every day,” 

“Hank, do you want me to speak to Dr. Stadier about it?” 

“Certainly not!” 

“He ought to stop it. He could at least do that much.” 

“I’d rather go to jail. Dr. Stadier? You’re not having anything to 
do with him, are you?” 

“I saw him a few days ago.” 

“Why?” 

“In regard to the motor.” 

“The motor , . . ?” He said it slowly, in a strange way, as if the 
thought of the motor had suddenly brought back to him a realm he 
had forgotten. “Dagny . . . the man who invented that motor . . . 
he did exist, didn’t he?” 

“Why . . of course. What do you mean?” 

“I mean only that . . that it’s a pleasant thought, isn’t it? Even 

if he's dead now, he was alive once ... so alive that he designed 
that motor. . . 

“What’s the matter, Hank?” 

“Nothing. Tell me about the motor.” 

She told him about her meeting with Dr. Stadier. She got up and 
paced the room, while speaking; she could not lie still, she always 
felt a surge of hope and of eagerness for action when she dealt with 
the subject of the motor. 

The first thing he noticed were the fights of the city beyond the 
window: he felt as if they were being turned on, one by one, forming 
the great skyline he loved; he felt it, even though he knew that the 
lights had been there all the time. Then he understood that the thing 
which was returning was within him; the shape coming back drop by 

349 



drop was his love for the city. Then he knew that it had come back 
because he was looking at the city past the taut, slender figure of a 
woman whose head was lilted eagerly as at a sight of distance, whose 
steps were a restless substitute for flight. He was looking at her as 
at a stranger, he was barely aware that she was a woman, but the 
sight was flowing into a feeling the words for which were: This is 
the world and the core of it, this is what made the city — they go 
together, the angular shapes of the buildings and the angular lines 
of a face stripped of everything but purpose - the rising steps of 
steel and the steps of a being intent upon his goal — this is what 
they had been, all the men who had lived to invent the lights, the 
steel, the furnaces, the motors — they were the world, they, not the 
men who crouched in dark corners, half-begging, half-threatening, 
boastfully displaying their open sores as their only claim on life and 
virtue — so long as he knew that there existed one man with the 
bright courage of a new thought, could he give up the woild to those 
others? — so long as he could find a single sight to give him a life- 
restoring shot of admiration, could he believe that the woild be- 
longed to the sores, the moans and the guns? — the men who invented 
motors did exist, he would never doubt their reality, it was his vision 
of them that had made the contrast unbearable, so that even the 
loathing was the tribute ol his loyalty to them and to that world 
which was theirs and his 

“Dailing . he said, “'darling . like a man awakening sud- 
denly. when he noticed that she had stopped speaking 

‘’What’s the matter. Hank?” she asked softly. 

"Nothing . . . {Except that you shouldn't have called Stadler “ His 
face was bright with confidence, his voice sounded amused, protec- 
tive and gentle: she could discover mulling else, he looked as he had 
always looked, it was only the note of gentleness that seemed strange 
and new. 

"1 kept feeling that 1 shouldn't have,” she said, “but I didn't 
know why ” 

"I'll tell yoti why.” He leaned forward. “What he wanted from 
you was a recognition that he was still the l)r. Robert Stadler he 
should have been, but wasn't and knew he wasn't. He wanted you 
to grant him your respect, in spite of and in contradiction to his 
actions. He wanted you to tuggle reality for him, so that his greatness 
would remain, but the State Science Institute would be wiped out. 
as it it had never existed- -and you're the only one who could do it 
for him “ 

“Why I?” 

“Because you’re the victim.” 

She looked at him, startled. He spoke intently: he felt a sudden, 
violent clarity of perception, as it a surge ol energy were; rushing 
into the activify of sight, fusing the half-seen and half-grasped into 
a single shape and direction. 

“Dagny, they’re doing something that we’ve never u/uferstood. 
They know something which we don’t, but should discover I can’t 
see it fully yet, but I’m beginning to see parts of it. That lodjter from 
the State Science Institute was scared when ! refused to help him 

350 



pretend that he was just an honest buyer of my MetaL He was scared 
way deep. Of what? I don’t know —public opinion was just his name 
for it, but it's not the full name. Why should he have been scared? 
He has the guns, the jails, the laws — he could have seized the whole 
of my mills, if he wished, and nobody would have risen to defend 
me, and he knew it— so why should he have cared what l thought? 
But he did. It was I who had to tell him that he wasn’t a looter, but 
my customer and friend. That’s what he needed from me. And that’s 
what Dr. Stadler needed from you — it was you who had to act as if 
he were a great man who had never tried to destroy your rail and 
my Metal. I don’t know what it is that they think they accomplish — 
but they want us to pretend that we see the world as they pretend 
they see it. They need some sort of sanction from us. I don’t know 
the nature of that sanction — but, Dagny, I know that if we value our 
lives, we must not give it to them. If they put you on a torture rack, 
don’t give it to them. Let them destroy your railroad and my mills, 
but don’t give it to them. Because I know this much: I know that 
that’s our only chance.” 

She had remained standing still before him, looking attentively at 
the faint outline of some shape she, too. had tried to grasp. 

"Yes . . .” she said. ”yes, I know what you’ve seen in them. . . . 
I’ve felt it, too — but it’s only like something brushing past that’s 
gone before I know I’ve seen it, like a touch of cold air, and what’s 
left is always the feeling that I should have stopped it. ... I know 
that you’re right. 1 can’t understand their game, but this much is 
right We must not see the world as they want us to see it. It’s some 
sort of fraud, very ancient and very vast — and the key to break it is: 
to check every premise they teach us. to question every precept, 
to—” 

She whirled to him at a sudden thought, but she cut the motion 
and the words in the same instant: the next woids would have been 
the ones she did not want to say to him She stood looking at him 
with a slow, bright smile of curiosity. 

Somewhere within him, ho knew the thought she would not name, 
but he knew it only in that prenatal shape which has to find its words 
in the future. He diet not pause to grasp it now — because in the 
Hooding brightness of what he felt, another thought, which was its 
predecessor, had become clear to him and had been holding him 
ior many minutes past. He rose, approached her and took her in 
his arms. 

He held the length of her body pressed to his. as it their bodies 
were two currents rising upward together, each to a single point, 
each carrying the whole of their consciousness to the meeting of 
their lips. 

What she felt in that moment contained, as one nameless part of 
it, the knowledge of the beauty in the posture of his body as he held 
her, as they stood in the middle of a room high above the lights of 
the city. 

What he knew, what he had discovered tonight, was that his recap- 
tured love of existence had not been given back to him by the return 
of his desire for her — but that the desire had returned after he had 

351 



regained his world, the love, the value and the sense of his world — 
and that the desire was not an answer to her body, but a celebration 
of himself and of his will to live. 

He did not know it, he did not think of it, he was past the need 
of woids, but tn the moment when he felt the response of her body 
to his, he felt also the unadmitted knowledge that that which he had 
called her depravity was her highest \irtue- -this capacity ol hers to 
feel the jo> of being, as he fell it. 


Chapter II THE ARISTOCRACY OF PULL 

The calendar in the sky he>ond the window ot hei oltiee said: Sep- 
tember 2. Dagny leaned wealth* across her desk. I he first light to 
snap on at the approach of dusk was always the ray that hit the 
calendar: when the white -glowing page appeared above the roofs, it 
blurred the city, hastening the darkness. 

She had looked at that distant page every evening of the months 
behind her Your days are numbered, it had seemed to say - as it it 
were marking a piogression toward something it knew, but she 
didn't. Once, it had docked her race to build the John C fait Line: 
now it was docking her race against an unknown destroyei 

One by one, the men who had built new towns in (oloiudo. had 
departed into some silent unknown, from which no voice or person 
had yet returned. The towns they had left were dying. Some of the 
factories they built had remained ownerless and locked; others had 
been seized by the local authorities, the machines m both stood still 

She had felt as if a dark map of Colorado were spiead before her 
like a traffic control panel, with a lew* lights scattered through its 
mountains. One after another, the lights had gone out. One after 
another, the men had vanished. There had been a pattern about it, 
which she felt, but could not define; she had become able to predict, 
almost with certainty, who would go next and when: she was unable 
to grasp the “why?” 

Of the men who had once greeted her descent from the cab of an 
engine on the platform of Wyatt Junction, only Ted Nielsen was left, 
still running the plant of Nielsen Motors. “Ted, you won t be the 
next one to go?” she had asked him, on his recent visit to New 
York; she had asked it, trying to smile. He had answered grimly, “1 
hope not.” “What do you mean, you hope? — aren’t you sure?*’ He 
had said slowly, heavily, “Dagny, I've always thought that Ld rather 
die than stop working. But so did the men who re gone. It seems 
impossible to me that 1 could ever want to quit. But a year ago, it 
seemed impossible that they ever could. Those men were my friends. 
They knew what their going would do to us, the survivors. They 
would not have gone like that, without a word, leaving to us the 
added terror of the inexplicable -unless they had some reason of 
supreme importance. A month ago, Roger Marsh, of Marsh 'Electric, 
told me he’d have himself chained to his desk, so that he Wouldn't 
be able to leave it, no matter what ghastly temptation struck him. 
He was furious with anger at the men who’d left. He swore to me 

352 



that he’d never do it. ‘And if it’s something that 1 can’t resist/ he 
said, i swear that I’ll keep enough of my mind to leave you a letter 
and give you some hint of what it is, so that you won’t have to rack 
your brain in the kind of dread we’re both feeling now.’ That’s what 
he swore. Two weeks ago, he went. He left me no letter. . . . Dagny, 
1 can’t tell what I’ll do when 1 see it— whatever it was that they saw 
when they went.” 

It seemed to her that some destroyer was moving soundlessly 
through the country and the lights were dying at his touch — some- 
one. she thought bitterly, who had reversed the principle of the 
Twentieth Century motor and was now turning kinetic energy into 
static. 

That was the enemy — she thought, as she sat at her desk in the 
gathering twilight — with whom she was running a race. The monthly 
report from Quentin Daniels lay on her desk. She could not be 
certain, as yet, that Daniels would solve the secret of the motor; but 
the destroyer, she thought, was moving swiftly, surely, at an ever 
accelerating tempo; she wondered whether, by the time she rebuilt 
the motor, there would be any world left to use it. 

She had liked Quentin Daniels from the moment he entered her 
office on their first interview. He was a lanky man in his early thirties,, 
with a homely, angular face and an attractive smite. A hint of the 
smile remained in his features at all times, particularly when he lis- 
tened; it was a look of good-natured amusement, as if he were swiftly 
and patiently discarding the irrelevant in the words he heard and 
going straight to the point a moment ahead of the speaker, 

“Why did you refuse to work for Dr. Stadler?” she asked. 

The hint of his smile grew harder and more stressed; this was as 
near as he came to showing an emotion; the emotion was anger. But 
he answered in his even, unhurried drawl, “You know. Dr. Stadler 
once said that the first word of ‘Free, scientific inquiry’ was redun- 
dant. He seems to have forgotten it. Well, I’ll just say that ‘Govern- 
mental scientific inquiry’ is a contradiction in terms.’' 

She asked him what position he held at the Utah Institute of 
Technology. “Night watchman,” he answered. "What?' 1 she gasped. 
“Night watchman,” he repeated politely, as if she had not caught 
the words, as if there were no cause for astonishment. 

Under her questioning, he explained that he did not like any of 
the scientific foundations left in existence, that he would have liked 
a job in the research laboratory of some big industrial concern — 
“But which one of them can afford to undertake any long-range 
work nowadays, and why should they?”— so when the Utah Institute 
ot Technology was closed for lack of funds, he had remained there 
as night watchman and sole inhabitant of the place: the salary was 
sufficient to pay for his needs — and the Institute’s laboratory was 
there, intact, for his own private, undisturbed use, 

“So you're doing research work of your own?” 

^That’s right.” 

“For what purpose?” 

“For my own pleasure.” 

“What do you intend to do, if you discover something of scientific 

353 



importance or commercial value? Do you intend to put it to some 
public use?'’ 

“1 don't know. I don’t think so.'* 

‘‘Haven't you any desire to be of service to humanity?” 

“I don’t talk that kind of language. Miss Taggart. 1 don’t think 
you do, either.” 

She laughed. “I think we ll get along together, vou and I.” 

“We will.” 

When she had told him the story of the motor, when he had 
studied the manuscript, he made no comment, but merely said that 
he >vould take the job on any terms she named. 

She asked him to choose his own terms She protested, in astonish- 
ment, against the low monthly salary he quoted. “Miss Taggart,” he 
said, “if there's something that I won’t take, it's something for noth- 
ing. I don’t know how long you might have to pay me, or whether 
you'll get anything at all in return I’ll gamble on my own mmd I 
won't let anybody else do it. I don’t collect tor an intention. But I 
sure do intend to collect for goods delivered. If I succeed, that’s 
when I’ll skin you alive, because what 1 want then is a percentage, 
and it’s going to be high, but it’s going to be worth your while ” 

When he named the percentage he wanted, she laughed. “That us 
skinning me alive and it will be worth my while. Okay.” 

They agreed that it was to be her private project and that he was 
to be her private employee; neither of them wanted to have to deal 
with the interference of the Taggart Research Department He asked 
to remain in Utah, in his post of watchman, where he had all the 
laboratory equipment and all the privacy he needed. The project was 
to remain confidential between them, until and unless he succeeded. 

“Miss Taggart." he said in conclusion, “l don’t know how many 
years it will take me to solve this, if ever. But I know that if I spend 
the rest of my life on it and succeed, I will die satisfied.” He added, 
“There’s only one thing that 1 want more than to solve it: it’s to 
meet the man who has." 

Once a month, since his return to Utah, she had sent him a check 
and he had sent her a report on his work. It was too early to hope, 
but bis reports were the only bright points in the stagnant fog ol her 
days in the office. 

She raised her head, as she finished reading his pages. The calen- 
dar in the distance said: September 2. The lights of the city had 
grown beneath it, spreading and glittering. She thought of Rearden. 
She wished he were in the city; she wished she would sec him tonight. 

Then, noticing the date, she remembered suddenly that she had 
to rush home to dress, because she had to attend Jim’s wedding 
tonight. She had not seen Jim, outside the office, for over a year. 
She had not met his fiancee, but she had read enough atyoul the 
engagement in the newspapers. She rose from her desk in? wearily 
distasteful resignation; it seemed easier to attend the weddjng than 
to bother explaining her absence afterwards. 

She was hurrying across the concourse of the Terminal vfrhen she 
heard a voice catling, “Miss Taggart!” with a strange note ofjurgcncy 
and reluctance, together. It stopped her abruptly; she took a few 

354 



seconds to realize that it was the old man at the cigar stand who 
had called. 

*Tve been waiting to catch sight of you for days. Miss Taggart. 
I’ve been extremely anxious to .speak to you.” There was an odd 
expression on his face, the look of an effort not to look frightened, 

“I’m sorry,” she said, smiling, “I’ve been rushing in and out of 
the building all week and didn't have time to stop.” 

He did not smile. “Miss Taggart, that cigarette with the dollar sign 
that you gave me some months ago — where did you get it?” 

She stood still for a moment. ‘Tm afraid that's a long* complicated 
story,” she answered. 

“Have you any way of getting in touch with the person who gave 
it to you?” 

“1 suppose so — though I’m not loo sure. Why?” 

“Would he tell you where he got it?” 

“1 don’t know. What makes you suspect that he wouldn’t?” 

He hesitated, then asked, “Miss Taggart, what do you do when you 
have to tell someone something which you know to be impossible?” 

She chuckled. “The man who gave me the cigarette said that in 
such a case one must check one’s premises.” 

“He did? About the cigarette?” 

“Well, no, not exactly. But why? What is it you have to tell me?” 

“Miss Taggart, 1 have inquired all over the world. 1 have checked 
every source ot information in and about the tobacco industry. 1 
have had that cigarette stub put through a chemical analysis. There 
is no plant that manufactures that kind of paper. The flavoring ele- 
ments in that tobacco have never been used in any smoking mixture 
I could find. That cigarette was machine-made, but it was not made 
in any factory I know -and I know them all Miss Taggart, to the 
best of my knowledge, that cigarette was not made anywhere on 
earth.” 

* * 

Reardcn stood by, watching absently, while the waiter wheeled 
the dinner table out of his hotel room. Ken Danagger had left. The 
loom was half-dark: by an unspoken agreement, they had kept the 
lights low during their dinner, so that Danagger’s face w'ould not be 
noticed and, perhaps, recognised by the waiters. 

They had had to meet furtively, like criminals who could not be 
seen together, 'l’hey could not meet m their offices or in their homes, 
only in the crowded anonymity of a city, in his suite at the Wayne- 
Falkland Hotel. There could be a fine of $10,000 and ten years of 
imprisonment for each of them, if it became known that he had 
agreed to deliver to Danagger four thousand tons of structural shapes 
of Rearden Metal. 

They had not discussed that law, at their dinner together, or their 
motives or the risk they were taking. They had merely talked busi- 
ness. Speaking clearly and dryly, as he always spoke at any confer- 
ence, Danagger had explained that half of his original order would 
be sufficient to brace such tunnels as would cave in, if he delayed 
the bracing much longer, and to recondition the mines of the Confedr 
erated Coal Company, gone bankrupt, which he had purchased three 

355 



weeks ago — “It’s an excellent property, but in rotten condition; they 
had a nasty accident there last month, cavern and gas explosion, 
forty men killed/' He had added, in the monotone of reciting some 
impersonal, statistical report, “The newspapers are yelling that coal 
is now the most crucial commodity in the country. They are also 
yelling that the coal operators arc profiteering in the oil shortage. 
One gang in Washington is yelling that l am expanding too much 
and something should be done to stop me, because 1 am becoming 
a monopoly. Another gang in Washington is yelling that i am not 
expanding enough and something should be done to let the govern- 
ment seize my mines, because I am greedy for profits and unwilling 
to satisfy the public's need of luel. At my present rate of profit, this 
Confederated Coal property will bring back the money I spent on 
it — m forty-seven years. 1 have no children. I bought it, because 
there’s one customer 1 don't dare leave without coal— and that’s 
Taggart Transcontinental. I keep thinking of what would happen il 
the railroads collapsed " He had stopped, then added, “1 don't know 
why I still care about that, but I do. Those people in Washington 
don’t seem to have a clear picture ot what that would be like. 1 
have.” Rearden had said, 'Til deliver the Metal. When you need 
the other half of your order, let me know. I’ll deliver that, too." 

At the end of the dinner. Da nagger had said in the same precise 
impassive tone, the tone of a man who knows the exact meaning of 
his words, “If any employee of yours or mine discovers this and 
attempts private blackmail, I will pay it. within reason. But 1 will 
not pay, if he has friends in Washington. II any of those come 
around, then I go to jail." “Then we go together," Rearden had said. 

Standing alone in his half-darkened room, Rearden noted that the 
prospect of going to jail left him blankly indifferent. He remembered 
the time when, aged fourteen, famt with hunger, he would not steal 
fruit from a sidewalk stand. Now. the possibility of being sent to 
jail — it this dinner was a felony — meant no more to him than the 
possibility ol }>eing run over by a truck, an ugly physical accident 
without any moral significance. 

He thought that he had been made to hide, as a guilty secret, the 
only business transaction he had enjoyed in a > ear’s work — and that 
he was hiding, as a guilty secret, his nights with Dagny, the only 
hours that kept him alive He felt that there was some connection 
between the two secrets, some essential connection which he had to 
discover. He could not grasp it, he could not find the words to name 
it, but he felt that the day when he would find them, he would 
answer every question of his life. 

He stood against the wall, his head thrown back, his eyes closed, 
and thought of Dagny, and then he felt that no questions could 
matter to him any longer. He thought that he would see hei£ tonight, 
almost hating it, because tomorrow morning seemed so ejose and 
then he would have to leave her — he wondered whether fie could 
remain in town tomorrow, or whether he should leave now^ without 
seeing her, so that he could wait, so that he could alwayi have it 
ahead of him: the moment of dosing his hands over her Shoulders 
and looking down at her face. You’re going insane, he thought— but 

356 



he knew that if she were beside him through every hour of his days, 
it would still be the same, he would never have enough of it, he 
would have to invent some senseless form of torture for himself in 
order to bear it — he knew he would see her tonight, and the thought 
of leaving without it made the pleasure greater, a moment's torture 
to underscore his certainty of the hours ahead. He would leave the 
light on in her living room, he thought, and hold her across the bed, 
and see nothing but the curve of the strip of light running from her 
waist to her ankle, a single line drawing the whole shape of her long, 
slim body in the darkness, then he would pull her head into the 
light, to see her face, to see it falling back, unresisting, her hair over 
his arm, her eyes closed, the face drawn as in a look of pain, her 
mouth open to him. 

He stood at the wall, waiting, to let all the events of the day drop 
away from him, to feel free, to know that the next span of time 
was his. 

When the door of his room flew open without warning, he did not 
quite hear or believe it. at first. He saw the silhouette of a woman, 
then of a bellboy who put down a suitcase and vanished. The voice 
he heard was Lillian’s: “Why, Henry! AH alone and in the dark?*’ 

She pressed a light switch by the door. She stood there, fastidiously 
groomed, wearing a pale beige traveling suit that looked as if she 
had traveled under glass; she was smiling and pulling her gloves off 
with the air of having reached home. 

“Are you in for the evening, dear?’ 5 she asked. “Or were you 
going out?” 

He did not know how long a time passed before he answered, 
“What are you doing here?” 

“Why, don’t you remember that Jim Taggart invited us to his 
wedding? It’s tonight.” 

“I didn’t intend to go to his wedding.” 

“Oh, but l did!” 

“Why didn’t you tell me this morning, before 1 left?” 

“To surprise you, darling.” She laughed gaily. “It’s practically im- 
possible to drag you to any social function, but 1 thought you might 
do it like this, on the spur of the moment, just to go out and have 
a good time, as married couples are supposed to. I thought you 
wouldn’t mind it — you’ve been staying overnight in New York so 
often!” 

He saw the casual glance thrown at him from under the brim of 
her fashionably tilted hat. He said nothing. 

“Of course, I was running a risk,” she said. “You might have been 
taking somebody out to dinner.” He said nothing. “Or weie you, 
perhaps, intending to return home tonight?” 

“No.” 

“Did you have an engagement for this evening?” 

“No.” 

“Fine.” She pointed at her suitcase. “1 brought my evening clothes. 
Will you bet me a corsage of orchids that 1 can get dressed faster 
than you can?” 

He thought that Dagny would be at her brother’s wedding tonight; 

357 



the evening did not matter to him any longer, ‘Til take you out, if 
you wish/’ he said, “but not to that wedding/’ 

“Oh, but that's where I want to go! It’s the most preposterous 
event of the season, and everybody's been looking forward to it for 
weeks, all my friends. I wouldn’t miss it for the world. There isn’t any 
better show in town — nor better publicized. It's a perfectly ridiculous 
marriage, but just about what you'd expect from Jim Taggart.” 

She was moving casually through the room, glancing around, as if 
getting acquainted with an unfamiliar place. “1 haven't been in New 
York for years/' she said. “Not with you, that is Not on any for- 
mal occasion/’ 

He noticed the pause in the aimless wandering ot her eyes, a 
glance that stopped briefly on a tilled ashtray and moved on. He lelt 
a stab of revulsion. 

She saw it in his face and laughed gaily. “Oh but, darling. I’m not 
relieved! I'm disappointed, I did hope I’d find a few cigarette butts 
smeared with lipstick/' 

He gave her credit for the admission ot the spying, even if under 
cover of a joke. Bur something in the stressed frankness ol her mari- 
ner made him wonder whether she was joking: lor the flash ot an 
instant, he felt that she had told him the truth Fie dismissed the 
impression, because he could not conceive ot it as possible. 

“I'm afraid that you'll never be human/’ she said. “So I'm sure 
that I have no rival. And if I have— which 1 doubt; darling 1 don't 
think I'll worry about it. because it it's a person who's always avail- 
able on call, without appointment -well, everybody knows what sort 
ot a person that is." 

He thought that he would have to be careful, he had been about 
to slap her face. “Lillian. 1 think you know.” he said, ‘th.it humor 
of this kind is more than 1 can .stand ” 

“Oh, you're so serious!” she laughed “1 keep forgetting it. You’ie 
so serious about everything— particularly youiselt “ 

Then she whirled to him suddenly, her smile gone. She had the 
strange, pleading look which he had seen in her face at tunes, a look 
that seemed made of sincerity anti courage’ 

“You prefer to be serious, Henry? All right How long do you 
wish me to exist somewhere m the basement of your hle* > How 
lonely do you want me to become* 1 I've asked nothing of you. I've 
let you live your life as you pleased, ( 'an t you give me one evening? 
Oh, 1 know you hale parties and you'll be bored. But it means a 
great deal to me. ('all it empty, social vanity - l want to appear, for 
once, with my husband. 1 suppose you never think ol it in such terms, 
but you're an important man, you’re envied, hailed, respected and 
feared, you're a man whom any woman would be proud to show off 
as her husband. You may say it’s a low form of feminine ostentation, 
but that’s the form of any woman’s happiness. You don't! live by 
such standards, but I do. Can’t you give me this much, at the price 
of a few hours of boredom? C an't you be strong enough |o fulfill 
your obligation and to perform a husband’s duty? C an't you jo there, 
not for your own sake, but mine, not because you want to go, but 
only because / want it?” 


358 



Dagny — he thought desperately — Dagny, who had never said a 
word about his life at home, who had never made a claim, uttered 
a reproach or asked a question — he could not appear before her 
with his wife, he could not let her see him as the husband being 
proudly shown off — he wished he could die now. in this moment, 
before he committed this action — because he knew that he would 
commit it. 

Because he had accepted his secret as guilt and promised himself 
to take its consequences™ because he had granted that the right was 
with Lillian, and he was able to bear any form of damnation, but 
not able to deny the right when it was claimed of him — because he 
knew that the reason for his refusal to go, was the reason that gave 
him no right to refuse — because he heard the pleading cry in his 
mind: “Oh God, Lillian, anything but that party!” and he did not 
allow himself to beg for mercy — 

- he said evenly, his voice lifeless and firm: 

“All right, Lillian. I’ll go.” 

♦ * 

The wedding veil of rose-point lace caught on the splintered floor 
of her tenement bedroom. Cherryl Brooks lifted it cautiously, step- 
ping to look at herself in a crooked mirror that hung on the wall. 
She had been photographed here all day, as she had been many 
times in the past two months. She still smiled with incredulous grati- 
tude when newspaper people wanted to take her picture, but she 
wished they would not do il so often. 

An aging sob sister, who had a drippy love column in print and 
the bitter wisdom ol a policewoman in person, had taken Cherryl 
under her protection weeks ago, when the girl had first been thrown 
into press interviews as into a meat grinder. Today, the sob sister 
had chased the reporters out, had snapped, “All right, all right, beat 
it!” at the ncighbois, had slammed Oherryl’s door m their faces and 
had helped her to dress. She was to drive Cherryl to the wedding: 
she had discovered that there was no one else to do it. 

The wedding veil, the white satin gown, the delicate slippers and 
the strand of pearls at her throat, had cost five hundred times the 
price of the entire contents of Cherryl's room. A bed took most of 
the room’s space, and the rest was taken by a chest of drawers, one 
chair, and her few dresses hanging behind a faded curtain. ITie huge 
hoop skiit of the wedding gown brushed against the wails when she 
moved, her slender figure swaying above the skirt in the dramatic 
contrast of a tight, severe, long-sleeved bodice: the gown had been 
made by the best designer in the city, 

“You see. when I got the job in the dime store, l could have 
moved to a better room,” she said to the sob sister, in apology, “but 
I don’t think it matters much where you sleep at night, so I saved my 
money, because I’ll need it for something important in the future—” 
She stopped and smiled, shaking her head dazedly. “1 thought Td 
need il,” she said, 

“You look fine,” said the sob sister. “You can’t see much in that 
alleged mirror, but you’re okay.” 

“The way all this happened, 1 ... I haven’t had time to catch up 

359 



with myself. Bui you sue. Jim is wonderful. He doesn’t mind it, that 
I'm only a salesgirl from a dime store, living in a place like this. He 
doesn’t hold it against me.” 

v 'Uh-huh.” said the sob sister: her face looked grim. 

Cherry l remembered the wonder ol the Ikst lime Jim l'aggart had 
come here. He had come one evening, without warning, a month 
after then lirst meeting when she had given up hope of ever seeing 
him again. She had been miserably embatrassed. she had felt as if 
she were uying to hold a sumise within the space ot a mud puddle — 
but Jim had smiled, silting on hei only chair, looking at her Hushed 
face and at hei room Then he had told her to put on her coat, and 
he had taken her to dinnet at the most expensive restaurant in the 
city. He had smiled at her uncertainty, at her awkwardness, at her 
terror of picking the wrong toik, and at the look of enchantment in 
her eyes. She had not known what he thought But he had known 
that she was stunned, not by the place, but by his bringing her there, 
that she barely touched the costly food, that she took the dinner, 
not as booty from a rich sucker— as all the girls he knew would 
have taken it — but as some shining award she had never expected 
to deserve 

He had come back to her two weeks later, and then their dates 
had grown progressively more frequent. He would drive up to the 
dime store at the closing hour, and she would sec hei tellovv salesgirls 
gaping at her. at his limousine, at the uniformed chauffcui who 
opened the door tor her. He would take her to the best night dubs, 
and when he introduced her to his friends, he would say, w 'Miss 
Brooks works in the dime store in Madison Square.” She would sec 
the strange expressions on their faces and Jim watching them with 
a hint of mockery in his eyes. He wanted to spare her the need of 
pretense or embarrassment, she thought with gratitude. He had the 
strength to be honest and not to care whether others approved ol 
him or not, she thought with admiration. But she fell an odd. burning 
pain, new to her, the night she heard some woman, who worked tor 
a highbrow political magazine, say to her companion at the next 
table, *“How generous of Jim!’’ 

Had he wished, she would have given him the only kind of pay- 
ment she could offer in return. She was grateful that he did not seek 
it. But she fell as if their relationship was an immense debt and she 
had nothing to pay it with, except her silent worship. He did not 
need her worship, she thought. 

There were evenings when he came to take her out. but remained 
in her room, instead, and talked to her. while she listened in silence, 
ft always happened unexpectedly, with a kind of peculiar abruptness, 
as if he had not intended doing it. but something burst within him 
and he had to speak. Then he sat slumped on her bed. unaware of 
his surroundings and of her presence, yet his eyes jcrkcjfi to her 
face once in a while, as if he had to be certain that a livipg being 
heard him. 

“ it wasn’t for myself, it wasn’t for myself at alt — why won't 
they believe me, those people? I had to grant the unions’ demands 
to cut down the trains — and the moratorium on bonds was the only 

360 



way f could do it, so (hat's why Wesley gave it to me. for the workers, 
not for myself. All the newspapers said that 1 was a great example 
(or all businessmen to follow — a businessman with a sense of social 
responsibility. Thai's what they said. It's true, isn't it? . . . Isn't it? . . . 
What was wrong about that moratorium * What il we did skip a few 
technicalities? It was foi a good purpose, livery one agrees that any- 
thing you do is good, so king as it’s not for yourself . . But she 
won’t give me credit lor a good purpose. She doesn't think anybody’s 
any good except hcisell. My sislei is a ruthless, conceited hitch, who 
won't take anyone's ideas but her own. Why do they keep 
looking at me that way — she and Rearden and all those people? 
Why are they so sure they're right? If I acknowledge their 
superiority in the material realm, why don’t they acknowledge mine 
in the spiritual? They have the brain, but 1 have the heart. They 
have the capacity to pioducc wealth, but I have the capacity to love. 
Isn’t mine the gi eater capacity? Hasn't it been recognized as the 
greatest through all the centuries oi human history? Why won't they 
recognize it? . . . Why aie they so sure they’re great? . , . And if 
they ’re gieat and I'm not - isn't that exattly why they should bow 
to me, because I’m not? Wouldn’t that be an ait ot true humanity? 
It takes no kindness to respect a man who deserves respect — it’s 
only a payment which he’s earned. To give an unearned respect is 
the supieme gesture ot chanty. , But they're incapable ul charity. 
They 're not human. T hey feci no concern for anyone’s need . . or 

weakness. No concern . . and no pity . . 

She could understand little ot n. but she understood that he was 
unhappy and that somebtxly had hurt him. He saw the pain of ten- 
derness in her face. the pain of indignation against his enemies, and 
he saw the glance intended for heroes - given to him by a person 
able to experience the emotion behind that glance. 

She did not know why she tell certain that she was the only one 
to whom he could confess his torture. She took it as a special honor, 
as one more gift. 

T he only way to be worthy of him, she thought, was never to ask 
him for anything He offered her money once, and she refused it, 
with such a bright, painful dare of anger m her eyes that he did not 
attempt it again. The anger was at herself: she wondered whether 
she had done something to make him think she was that kind of 
person. But she did not want to be ungrateful for his concern, or to 
embarrass him by her ugly poverty; she wanted to show him her 
eagerness to rise and justify his favor; so she told him that he could 
help her, if he wished, by helping her to find a better job. He did 
not answer. In the weeks that followed, she waited, but he never 
mentioned the subject. She blamed herself: she thought that she had 
offended him, that he had taken it as an attempt to use him. 

When he gave her an emerald bracelet, she was too shocked to 
understand. Trying desperately not to hurt him, she pleaded that she 
could not accept it “Why not?'’ he asked. “It isn’t as if you were a 
bad woman paying the usual price for it. Are you afraid that III 
start making demands? Don’t you trust me?” He laughed aloud at 
her stammering embarrassment. He smiled, with an odd kind of eo- 

361 



joyment, all through the evening when they went to a night dub and 
she wore the bracelet with her shabby black dress. 

He made her wear that bracelet again, on the night when he took 
her to a party, a great reception given by Mrs. Cornelius Pope, If 
he considered her good enough to bring into the home of his friends, 
she thought— the illustrious friends whose names she had seen on 
the inaccessible mountain peaks that were the society columns ot 
the newspapers — she could not embarrass him by wearing her old 
dress. She spent her year’s savings on an evening gown of bright 
green chiffon with a low neckline, a belt of yellow roses and a rhine- 
stone buckle. When she entered the stern residence, with the cold, 
brilliant lights and a terrace suspended over the roofs of skyscrapers, 
she knew that her dress was wrong for the occasion, though she 
could not tell why. But she kept her posture proudly straight and 
she smiled with the courageous trust of a kitten when it sees a hand 
extended to play: people gathered to have a good time would not 
hurt anyone, she thought. 

At the end of an hour, her attempt to smile had become 4 helpless, 
bewildered plea. Then the smile went, as she watched the people 
around her. She saw that the trim, confident girls had a nasty inso- 
lence of manner when they spoke to Jim, as if they did not respect 
him and never had. One of them in particular, a Betty Pope, the 
daughter of the hostess, kept making remarks to him which Cherry 1 
could not understand, because she could not believe that she under- 
stood them correctly. 

No one had paid any attention to her, at first, except for a few 
astonished glances at her gown After a while, she saw them looking 
at her. She heard an elderly woman ask Jim, in the anxious lone of 
referring to some distinguished family she had missed knowing, ‘‘Did 
you say Miss Brooks of Madison Square?” She saw an odd smile on 
Jim’s face, when he answered, making his voice sound peculiarly 
clear, “Yes — ^he cosmetics counter of Raleigh’s Five and Ten.” Then 
she saw some people becoming too polite to her, and others moving 
away in a pointed manner, and most of them being senselessly awk- 
ward in simple bewilderment, and Jim watching silently with that 
odd smile. 

She tried to get out of the way, out of their notice. As she slipped 
by, along the edge of the room, she heard some man say, with a 
shrug, “Well, Jim Taggart is one of the most powerful men in Wash- 
ington at the moment.” He did not say it respectfully. 

Out on the terrace, where it was darker, she heard two men talking 
and wondered why she felt certain that they were talking about her. 
One of them said, “Taggart can afford to do if, if he pleases,” and 
the other said something about the horse of some Roman emperor 
named Caligula. 

She looked at the lone straight shaft of the Taggart Building rising 
in the distance— and then she thought that she understood: these 
people hated Jim became they envied him. Whatever they ^ere, she 
thought, whatever their names and their money, none of them had 
an achievement comparable to his, none af them had defied the 
whole country to build a railroad everybody thought impossible. For 

362 



the first time, she saw that she did have something to offer Jim: 
these people were as mean and small as the people from whom she 
had escaped in Buffalo; he was as lonely as she had always been, and 
the sincerity of her feeling was the only recognition he had found. 

Then she walked back into the ballroom, cutting straight through 
the crowd, and the only thing left of the tears she had tried to hold 
back in the darkness of the terrace, was the fiercely luminous sparkle 
of her eyes. It he wished to stand by her openly, even though she 
was only a shopgirl, if he wished to Haunt it, if he had brought her 
here to face the indignation of his friends —then it was the gesture 
of a courageous man defying their opinion, and she was willing to 
match his courage by serving as the scarecrow of the occasion. 

But she was glad when it was over, when she sat beside him in 
his car, driving home through the darkness. She felt a bleak kind of 
relief. Her battling defiance ebbed into a strange, desolate feeling; 
she tned not to give way to it. Jim said little; he sat looking sullenly 
out the car window, she wondered whether she had disappointed 
him in some manner. 

On the stoop of her rooming house, she said to him forlornly, 
‘Tin sorry it I let you down 

He did not answer for a moment, and then he asked, “What would 
you say if I asked you to marry me?" 

She looked at him. she looked around them - there was a filthy 
mattress hanging on somebody's window sill, a pawnshop across the 
street, a garbage pail at the stoop beside them - one did not ask such 
a question in such a place, she did not know what it meant, and she 
answered. “1 guess 1 . 1 haven't any sense of humor." 

“This is a proposal, my deal." 

then this was the way they reached their first kiss -wiih tears 
running down her face, tears unshed at the party, tears of shock, of 
happiness, of thinking that this should be happiness, and of a low, 
desolate voice telling her that this was not the way she would have 
wanted it to happen 

She had not thought about the newspapers, until the day when 
Jim told her to come to Ins apaitmcnt and she found it crowded 
with people who had notebooks, cameras and Hash bulbs. When she 
saw her picture in the papers lor the first time- a picture ot them 
together, Jim s arm around her she giggled with delight and won- 
dered proudly whether every person in the city had seen it. After a 
while, the delight vanished. 

They kept photographing her at the dime-store counter, in the 
subway, on the sloop of the tenement house, in her miserable room 
She would have taken money from Jim now and run to hide in some 
obscure hotel tor the weeks of their engagement -but he did not 
offer it. He seemed to want her to remain where she was. They 
printed pictures of Jim at his desk, in the concourse of the Taggart 
Terminal, by the steps of his private lailway car, at a formal banquet 
in Washington, The huge spreads of full newspaper pages, the articles 
in magazines, the radio voices, the newsreels, all were a single. long, 
sustained scream— about the "Cinderella Girl" and the "Demo- 
cratic Businessman.” 

3b3 



She told herself not to be suspicious, when she felt uneasy; she 
told herself not to be ungrateful, when she felt hurt She felt it only 
in a few rare moments, when she awakened in the middle of the 
night and lay in the silence of her room, unable to sleep. She knew 
that it would take her years to recover, to believe, to understand. 
She was reeling through her days like a person with a sunstroke, 
seeing nothing but the figure of Jim Taggart as she had seen him 
first on the night of his great triumph. 

‘‘listen, kid,** the sob sister said to her, when she stood in her 
room for the last time, the lace of the wedding veil streaming like 
crystal foam from her hair to the blotched planks of the floor, “You 
think that if one gets hurt in life, it's through one’s own sins— and 
that’s true, in the long run. But there are people who’ll try to hurt 
you through the good they see in you — knowing that it's the good, 
needing it and punishing you for it. Don’t let it break you when you 
discover that.” 

“1 don’t think I'm afraid,” she said, looking intently straight before 
her, the radiance of her smile melting the earnestness of her glance. 
“I have no right to be afraid of anything. I’m too happy. You see, 
I always thought that there wasn't any sense in people saying that 
all you can do in life is suffer. I wasn't going to knuckle down to 
that and give up. 1 thought that things could happen which were 
beautiful and very great. 1 didn’t expect it to happen to me— not so 
much and so soon. Bui I’ll try to live up to it." 

* * 

“Money is the root of all evil,” said James Taggart. “Money can t 
buy happiness. Love will conquer any barrier and any social distance. 
That may be a bromide, boss, but that’s how I feel.” 

He stood under the lights of the ballroom of the Wayne-Falkland 
Hotel, in a circle Of reporters who had closed about him the moment 
the wedding ceremony ended. He heard the crowd of guests beating 
like a tide beyond the circle. Cherryl stood beside him, her white- 
gloved hand onjthe black of his sleeve. She was still trying to hear the 
words of the ceremony, not quite believing that she had heard them. 
- “How do you feel, Mrs. Taggart ?” 

She heard the question from somewhere in the circle of reporters. 
It was like the jolt of returning to consciousness: two words suddenly 
made everything real to her. She smiled and whispered, choking, 
“I . . . I’m very happy . . 

At opposite ends of the ballroom, Orren Boyle, who seemed too 
stout for his full-dress clothes, and Bertram Scudder, who seemed 
too meager for his. surveyed the crowd of guests with the same 
thought, though neither of them admitted that he was thinking it 
Orren Boyle half-told himself that he was looking for the faces of 
friends, and Bertram Scudder suggested to himself that he wap gath- 
ering material for an article. But both, unknown to each olhef, were 
drawing a mental chart of the faces they saw, classifying then* under 
two headings which, if named, would have read: “Favor” and ‘fFcaf .” 
There were men whose presence signified a special protection ex- 
tended to Janies Taggart, and men whose presence confessed k desire 
to avoid his hostility— those who represented a hand lowered to pull 

364 



him up* and those who represented a back bent to let him climb. By 
the unwritten code of the day, hobody received or accepted an invita- 
tion from a man of public prominence except in token of one or the 
other of these motives. Those in the first group were, for the most 
part, youthful; they had come from Washington. Those in the second 
group were older; they were businessmen. 

Orren Boyle and Bertram Scudder were men who used words as 
a public instrument, to be avoided in the privacy of one’s own mind. 
Woids were a commitment, carrying implications which they did not 
wish to face. They needed no words for their chart; the classification 
was done by physical means: a respectful movement of their eye- 
brows, equivalent to the emotion of the word “So!” for the first 
group-— and a sarcastic movement of their lips, equivalent to the 
emotion of “Well, well!” for the second. One lace blew up the 
smooth woiktng of their calculating mechanisms for a moment: when 
they saw the cold blue eyes and blond hair of Hank Rearden, their 
muscles tore at the register of the second group m the equivalent of 
'Oh, boy!” The sum of the chart was an estimate of James Taggart's 
power It added up to an impressive total. 

They knew that James Taggart was tully aware of it when they 
saw him moving among his guests. He walked briskly, in a Morse 
code pattern of short dashes and brief stops, with a manner of faint 
irritation, as if conscious ot the number of people whom his displea- 
sure might worry. The hint of a smile on his face had a flavor of 
gloating— as it he knew that the act ol coming to honor him was 
an act that disgraced the men who had come; as it he knew and 
enjoyed it 

A tail of figures kept trailing and shifting behind him, as if their 
1 unction were to give him the pleasure of ignoring them. Mr. Mowcn 
llickered briefly among the tail, and Dr. Pritchett, and Balph Eubank. 
Hie most persistent one was Paul Larkin. He kepi describing eircle*s 
around Taggart, as ll trying to acquire a suntan by means of an 
occasional ray. his wistful smile pleading to be noticed. 

Taggart's eyes swept ovei the crowd once in a while, swiftly and 
furtively, in the manner of a prowler's flashlight, this, in the muscular 
shorthand legible to Orren Boyle, meant that Taggart was looking 
for someone and did not want anyone to know it. 1'he search ended 
when Eugene Lawson came to shake Taggart's hand and to say. his 
wet lower lip twisting like a cushion to soften the blow, “Mr. Mouch 
couldn’t come, Jim, Mr. Mouch is so sorry, he had a special plane 
chartered, but at the last minute things came up. crucial national 
problems, you know.” Taggart stood still, did not answer and 
frowned. 

Orren Boyle burst out laughing. Taggart tinned to him so sharply 
that the others melted away without waiting for a command to 
vanish. 

“What do you think you’re doing?” snapped Taggart. 

“Having a good time, Jimmy, just having a good time,” said Boyle. 
“Wesley is your boy, wasn't he?” 

“Lknow somebody who's my boy and he'd better not forget it'' 

“Who? Larkin? Well, no, I don't think you’re talking about Lar- 

365 



kin. And if it’s not Larkin that you're talking about, why then I 
think you ought to be careful in your use of the possessive pronouns. 
1 don’t mind the age classification, I know I look young for my years, 
but I’m just allergic to pronouns.” 

“That’s very smart, but you’re going to get too smart one of 
these days.” 

“If I do, you just go ahead and make the most of it, Jimmy. //” 

“The trouble with people who overreach themselves is that they 
have short memories. You’d better remember who got Rearden 
Metal choked off the market for you.” 

“Why. f remember who promised to. That was the party who then 
pulled every string he could lay his hands on to try to prevent that 
particular directive from being issued, because he figured he might 
need rail of Rearden Metal in the future.” 

“Because you spent ten thousand dollars pounng liquor into peo- 
ple you hoped would prevent the directive about the bond mora- 
torium!” 

“That’s right. So I did. 1 had friends who had railroad bonds. And 
besides, 1 have friends in Washington, too, Jimmy. Well, your friends 
beat mine on that moratorium business, but mine beat yours on 
Rearden Metal — and I’m not forgetting it. But what the hell! — it's 
all right with me, that’s the way to share things around, only don't 
you try to fool rue, Jimmy. Save the act for the suckers.” 

“If you don’t believe that I’ve always tried to do my best for 
you — ” 

“Sure, you have. The best that could be expected, all things consid- 
ered. And you'll continue to do it. too, so long as I’ve got somebody 
you need — and not a minute longer. So 1 just wanted to remind you 
that I’ve got my own friends in Washington. Friends Lhat money 
can’t buy— just like yours, Jimmy.” 

“What do you think you mean?” 

“Just what you’re thinking. The ones you buy aren’t really worth 
a damn, because somebody can always offer them more, so the field’s 
wide open to anybody and it’s just like old-lashioned competition 
again. But if you get the goods on a man, then you’ve got him, then 
there’s no higher bidder and you can count on his friendship. Well, 
you have friends, and so have 1. You have friends I can use, and 
vice versa. That’s all right with me — what the hell!— one’s got to 
trade something If we don’t trade money — and the age of money is 
past — then we trade men.” 

“What is it you're driving at?” 

“Why, I'm just telling you a lew things that you ought to remem- 
ber. Now take Wesley, for instance. You promised him the assistant’s 
job in the Bureau of National Planning — for double -crossing Rear- 
den, at the time of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill. You had 
the connections to do it, and that’s what 1 asked you to!do~~in 
exchange for the Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule, where I had the tonnec- 
tions. So Wesley did his part, and you saw to it that you g£>t it all 
on paper — oh sure, f know that you’ve got written proof of the kind 
of deals he pulled to help pass that bill, while he was taking Rear- 
deiTs money to defeat it and keeping Rearden off guard. Thtiy were 

366 



pretty ugly deals. It would be pretty messy for Mr. Mouch, if it all 
came out in public. So you kept your promise and you got the job 
for him* because you thought you had him. And so you did. And he 
paid off pretty handsomely, didn’t he? But it works only just so long. 
After a while, Mr. Wesley Mouch might get to be so powerful and 
the scandal so old, that nobody will care how he got his start or 
whom he double-crossed. Nothing lasts forever. Wesley was Rear- 
den s man. and then he was your man, and he might be somebody 
eise’s man tomorrow.” 

“Are you giving me a hint?” 

“Why no, I’m giving you a friendly warning. We’re old friends, 
Jimmy, and I think that that's what we ought to remain. 1 think we 
can be very useful to each other, you and l, if you don’t start getting 
the wrong ideas about friendship. Me--1 believe in a balance of 
power.” 

“Did you prevent Mouch from coming here tonight?” 

“Well, maybe I did and maybe 1 didn’t. I’ll let you worry about 
it. That's good for me. if I did -and still better, if 1 didn't ” 

Cherryl's eyes followed James Taggart through the crowd. The 
faces that kept shifting and gathering around her seemed so friendly 
and their voices were so eagerly warm that she fell certain there was 
no malice anywhere in the room. She wondered why some of them 
talked to her about Washington, in a hopeful, confidential manner 
of half -sentences, half-hints, as if they were seeking her help for 
something secret she was supposed to understand. She did not know 
what to say, but she smiled and answered whatever she pleased. She 
could not disgrace the person of “Mrs. Taggart” by any touch of fear. 

Then she saw the enemy. It was a tall, slender figure in a gray 
evening gown, who was now her sister-in-law. 

The pressure ol anger in C herryl’s mind was the stored accumula- 
tion of the sounds of Jim's tortured voice. She felt the nagging pull 
of a duty left undone. Her eyes kept returning to the enemy and 
studying her intently. The pictures of Dagnv Taggart in the newspa- 
pers had shown a figuie dressed in slacks, or a face with a slanting 
hat brim and a raised coat collar Now she wore a gray evening gown 
that seemed indecent, because it looked austerely modest, so modest 
that it vanished from one's awareness and left one too aware of the 
slender body it pretended to cover. There was a tone of blue in the 
gray cloth that went with the gun-metal gray of her eyes. She wore 
no jewelry, only a bracelet on her wrist, a chain of heavy metal links 
with a green blue cast. 

Cherryl waited, until she saw Dagny standing alone, then tore 
forward, cutting resolutely across the room. She looked at dose 
range into the gun-metal eyes that seemed cold and intense at once, 
the eyes that looked at her directly with a polite, impersonal 
curiosity. 

. “There’s something 1 want you to know,” said Cherryl, her voice 
taut and harsh, “so that there won t be any pretending about it. I’m 
not .going to put on the sweet relative act. I know what you've done 
to Jim and how you've made him miserable all his life. I’m going to 

367 



protect him against you, PU put you in your place. I'm Mrs. Taggart. 
I'm the woman in this family now " 

“That's quite all right," said Dagny. "Pm the man." 

Chenyl watched her walk away, and thought that Jim had been 
right: this sister of his was a creature of cold evil who had given her 
no response, no acknowledgment, no emotion of any kind except a 
touch of something that looked like an astonished, indifferent 
amusement. 

Rearden stood by Lillian’s side and followed her when she moved. 
She wished to be seen with her husband; he was complying. He did 
not know whether anyone looked at him or not: he was aware of 
no one around them, except the person whom he could not permit 
himself to see. 

The image still holding his consciousness was the moment when 
he had entered this room with Lillian and had seen Dagny looking 
at them. He had looked straight at her, prepared to accept any blow 
her eyes would choose to give him. Whatever the consequences to 
Lillian, he would have confessed his adultery publicly, there and in 
that moment, rather than commit the unspeakable act of evading 
Dagny’s eyes, of closing his face into a coward’s blankness, of pre- 
tending to her that he did not know the nature of his action. 

But there had been no blow. He knew every shade of sensation 
ever reflected in Dagny 's face; he had known that she had felt no 
shock; he had seen nothing but an untouched serenity. Her eyes had 
moved to his, as if acknowledging the full meaning of this encounter, 
but looking at him as she would have looked anywhere, as she 
looked at him in his office or in her bedroom. It had seemed to him 
that she had stood before them both, at the distance of a few steps, 
revealed to them as simply and openly as the gray dress revealed 
her body. 

She had bowed to them, the courteous movement of her head 
including them both He had answered, he had seen Lillian’s brief 
nod, and then # he had seen Lillian moving away and realized that he 
had stood with his head bowed for a long moment. 

He did not know what Lillian’s friends were saying to him or what 
he was answering. As a man goes step by step, trying not to think 
of the length of a hopeless road, so he went moment by moment, 
keeping no imprint of anything in his mind. He heard snatches of 
Lillian’s pleased laughter and a tone of satisfaction in her voice. 

After a while, he noticed the women around him; they all seemed 
to resemble Lillian, with the same look of static grooming, with thin 
eyebrows plucked to a static lift and eyes frozen in a static amuse- 
ment. He noticed that they were trying to flirt with him, and that 
Lillian watched it as if she were enjoying the hopelessness of their 
attempts. This, then — he thought — was the happiness of feminine 
vanity which she had begged him to give her, these were tpc stan- 
dards which he did not live by, but had to consider. He tufned for 
escape to a group of men. 

He could not find a single straight statement in the conversation 
of the men; whatever subject they seemed to be talking abopt never 
seemed to be the subject they were actually discussing. He listened 

368 



like a foreigner who recognized some of the words, but could not 
connect them into sentences. A young man, with a look of alcoholic 
insolence, staggered past the group and snapped, chuckling, 
“Learned your lesson. Rear den?” He did not know what the young 
rat had meant, but everybody else seemed to know it; they looked 
shocked and secretly pleased 

Lillian drifted away from him. as if letting him understand that she 
did not insist upon his literal attendance He retreated to a corner of 
the room where no one would see him or notice the direction of his 
c>es. Then he permuted himself to look at Dagnv. 

He watched the gray dress, the shifting movement of the soft cloth 
when she walked, the momentary pauses sculptured by the cloth, the 
shadows and the light. He saw' it as a bluish-gra> smoke held shaped 
tor an instant into a long curve that slanted tot ward to her knee and 
back to the tip of her sandal. He knew eveiy tacet the light would 
shape if the smoke were ripped away. 

He felt a murky, twisting pain: it was jealousy of every man who 
spoke to her. He had never felt it before; but he felt it here, where 
everyone had the right to approach her. except himself 

Then, as if a single, sudden blow to his brain blasted a moment's 
shift of petspective. lie tdt an immense astonishment at what he was 
doing here and why He lost, foi that moment, all the days and 
dogmas ol his past: his concepts, his problems, his pain were wiped 
out. he knew- only -as from a great, clear distance -that man exists 
for the achievement ot his desires, and he wondered why he stood 
here, he wondered who had the right to demand that he waste a 
single irreplaceable hour of his hte, when his only desire was to seize 
the slender figure in gray and hold her through the length of what- 
ever time there was left foi him to exist. 

In the next moment, he loll the shudder of recapturing his mind. 
He fell the tight, contemptuous movement of his lips pressed to- 
gether in token of the words he cried to himself: You made a con- 
tract once, now stick to it. And then he thought suddenly that in 
business transactions the courts of law did not recognize a contract 
wherein no valuable consideration had been given by one party to 
the other. He wondered what made him think of it. The thought 
seemed irrelevant. He did not pursue it. 

James Taggart saw Lillian Reardon drift casually toward him at 
the one moment when he chanced to be alone in the dim corner 
between a potted palm and a window. He stopped and waited to let 
her approach. He could not guess her purpose, but this was the 
manner which, in the code he understood, meant that he had better 
hear her. 

“How do you like my wedding gift, Jim?" she asked, and laughed 
at his look of embarrassment “No, no, don't try to go over the list 
ot things in your apartment, wondering which one the hell it was. 
It’s not m your apartment, it’s right here, and it’s a non-material 
gift, darling.” 

He saw the half-hint of a srmle on her face, the look understood 
among his friends as an invitation to share a secret victory: it was 
the look, not of having outthought, but of having outsmarted some* 

369 



body. He answered cautiously, with a safely pleasant smile, “Your 
presence is the best gift you could give me.” 

“ My presence, Jim?” 

The lines of his face were shock-bound for a moment. He knew 
what she meant, but he had not expected her to mean it. 

She smiled openly. “We both know whose presence is the most 
valuable one for you tonight — and the unexpected one. Didn't you 
really think of giving me credit for it? I’m surprised at you. 1 thought 
you had a genius for recognizing potential friends.” 

He would not commit himself; he kept his voice carefully neutral. 
“Have I failed to appreciate your friendship, Lillian?” 

"Now, now, darling, you know what I’m talking about. You didn’t 
expect him to come here, you didn’t really think that he is afraid of 
you, did you? But to have the others think he is — that’s quite an 
inestimable advantage, isn’t it?” 

"I’m . . . surprised, Lillian." 

"Shouldn’t you say ‘impressed’? Your guests are quite impressed. 
I can practically hear them thinking all over the room. Most of them 
are thinking: if he has to seek terms with Jim Taggart, we’d belter 
toe the line.’ And a few are thinking: if he's afraid, we’ll get away 
with much more.’ This is as you want it, of course — and 1 wouldn't 
think of spoiling your triumph — but you and I are the only' ones who 
know that you didn’t achieve it single-handed." 

He did not smile; he asked, his face blank, his voice smooth, but 
with a carefully measured hint of harshness, "What’s your angle?" 

She laughed. "Essentially — the same as yours. Jim. But speaking 
practically — none at all. It’s just a favor I’ve done you. and I need 
no favor in return. Don’t worry. I’m not lobbying lor any special 
interests. I’m not after squeezing some particular directives out of 
Mr. Mouch, I'm not even after a diamond tiara from you. Unless, 
of course, it’s a tiara of a non-material order, such as your ap- 
preciation.” * 

He looked straight at her for the first time, his eyes narrowed, his 
face relaxed to the same half-smile as hers, suggesting the expression 
which, for both of them, meant that they felt at home with each 
other: an expression of contempt. "You know that I have always 
admired >ou, Lillian, as one of the truly superior women.” 

‘Tm aware of it." There was the faintest coating of mockery 
spread, like shellac, over the smooth notes of her voice. 

He was studying her insolently. “You must forgive me if f think 
that some curiosity is permissible between friends,” he said, with no 
tone of apology. “I’m wondering from what angle you contemplate 
the possibility of certain financial burdens— «*r losses — whi<£h affect 
your own personal interests.” 

She shrugged. “From the angle of a horsewoman, darling;. If you 
had the most powerful horse in the world, you would keep if bridled 
down to the gait required to carry you in comfort, even though this 
meant the sacrifice of its full capacity, even though its U$> speed 
would never be seen and its great power would be wasted. You 
would do it — because if you let the horse go full blast, it would throw 

370 



you off in no time. . . . However, financial aspects are not my chief 
concern— nor yours, Jim,” 

“1 did underestimate you,” he said slowly. 

“Oh, well, that’s an error Lm willing to help you correct. I know 
the sort of problem he presents to you. I know why you’re afraid of 
him, as you have good reason to be. But . . . well, you're in business 
and in politics, so I’ll try to say it in your language. A businessman 
says that he can deliver the goods, and a ward heeler says that he 
can deliver the vote, is that right? Well, what 1 wanted you to know is 
that 1 can dehvei him, any time 1 choose. You may act accordingly.’* 
In the code of his friends, to reveal any part of one’s self was to 
give a weapon to an enemy— but he signed her confession and 
matched it, when he said, “1 wish I were as smart about my sister.” 

She looked at him without astonishment; she did not find the 
words irrelevant. “Yes, there's a tough one,” she said. “No vulnera- 
ble point‘ > No weaknesses 7 ” 

“None.” 

“No love affairs?” 

“(iod, no!” 

She slnugged, in sign of changing the subject: Dagny Taggart was 
a person on whom she did not care to dwell. “I think I'll let you 
run along, so that vou can chat a little with Fialph hubank.” she 
said. “He looks worried, because you haven’t looked at him all eve- 
ning and he’s wondering whether iiteiatuie will tie loll without a 
friend at court.’’ 

“Lillian, you're wonderful!” he said quite spontaneously. 

She laughed. “ I hat. rnv dear, is the non-material tiara I wanted!*’ 
I he remnant of a smile stayed on her face as she moved through 
the crowd, a Hunt smite that ran softly into the look of tension and 
boredom worn by all the faces around her. She moved at random, 
enjoying the sense ol being seen, her eggshell satin gown shimmering 
like heavy cream with the motion of her tall figure 

ft was the green-blue spark that caught her attention, it Hashed 
loi an instant undet the lights, on the wrist of a thin, naked arm. 
Then she saw the slender body, the gray dress, the fragile, naked 
shoulders. She stopped. She looked at the bracelet, frowning. 

Dagny turned at her approach. Among the many things that Lillian 
resented, the impersonal politeness of Dagny 's face w'as the one she 
resented most, 

“What do you think of your brother’s marriage. Miss Taggart?” 
she asked casually, smiling. 

“I have no opinion about it.” 

“Do you mean to say that you don’t find it worthy of any 
thought?” 

“It you wish to be exact yes, that’s what 1 mean.” 

“Oh, but don't you sec any human significance in it?” 

“No.” 

“Don’t you think that a person such as your brother's bride does 
deserve some interest?” 

SM Why, no,” 

“I envy you. Miss Taggart. 1 envy your Olympian detachment. It 

371 



is, I think, the secret of why lesser mortals can never hope to equal 
your success in the field of business. They allow their attention to 
be divided — at least to the extent of acknowledging achievements in 
other fields/* 

“What achievements are we talking about?” 

“Don’t you grant any recognition at all to the women who attain 
unusual heights of conquest, not in the industrial, but in the 
human realm?** 

“1 don't think that there is such a word as ‘conquest* — in the 
human realm.” 

“Oh, but consider, for instance, how hard other women would 
have had to work— if work were the only means available to them — 
to achieve what this girl has achieved through the person of your 
brother.*’ 

“I don’t think she knows the exact nature of what she has 
achieved.” 

Rearden saw them together. He approached. He felt that he had 
to hear it, no matter what the consequences. He stopped silently 
beside them. He did not know whether Lillian was aware of his 
presence; he knew that Dagny was. 

“Do show a little generosity toward her. Miss Taggart,” said Lil- 
lian. “At least, the generosity of attention. You must not despise the 
women who do not possess your brilliant talent, but who exercise 
their own particular endowments. Nature always balances her gifts 
and offers compensations— don't you think so?” 

“T’m not sure 1 understand you.” 

“Oh, Tm sure you don’t want to hear me become more explicit!” 

“Why, yes, 1 do.” 

Lillian shrugged angrily; among the women who were her friends, 
she would have been understood and stopped long ago; but this was 
an adversary new to her — a woman who refused to be hurt. She did 
not care to speak more dearly, but she saw Rearden looking at her. 
She smiled and said, “Well, consider your sister-in-law. Miss Taggart. 
What chance did she have to rise in the world? None— by your 
exacting standards. She could not have made a successful career in 
business. She does not possess your unusual mind. Besides, men 
would have made it impossible for her. They would have found her 
too attractive. So she took advantage of the fact that men have 
standards which, unfortunately, are not as high as yours. She resorted 
to talents which, I’m sure, you despise. You have never cared to 
compete with us lesser women in the sole field of our ambition — in 
the achievement of power over men.” 

‘if you cal! it power, Mrs. Rearden — then, no, 1 haven’t/’ 

She turned to go, but Lillian’s voice stopped her: “1 would like to 
believe that you’re fully consistent. Miss Taggart, and fullir devoid 
of human frailties. 1 would like to believe that you’ve neve# felt the 
desire to flatter— or to offend — anyone. But 1 see that you expected 
both Henry and me to be here tonight.” 

“Why, no, 1 can’t say that I did, 1 had not seen my brother’s 
guest list.” 

“Then why are you wearing that bracelet?” 

372 



Dagny’s eyes moved deliberately straight to hers. “I always wear 
it.” 

“Don’t you think that that’s carrying a joke too far?” 

“It was never a joke, Mrs. Rearden.” 

“Then you'll understand me if I say that I’d like you to give that 
bracelet back to me.” 

“1 understand you. But 1 will not give it back.'’ 

Lillian let a moment pass, as if to let them both acknowledge the 
meaning of their silence. For once, she held Dagny’s glance without 
smiling. “What do you expect me to think, Miss Taggart?” 

“Anything you wish.” 

“What is your motive?” 

“You knew my motive when you gave me the bracelet.” 

Lillian glanced at Rearden. His face was expressionless; she saw 
no reaction, no hint of intention to help her or stop her. nothing 
but an attentiveness that made her feel as if she were standing in 
a spotlight. 

Her smile came back, as a protective shield, an amused, patroniz- 
ing smile, intended to convert the subject into a drawing-room issue 
again. “Lm sure. Miss Taggart, that you realize how enormously 
improper this is.’’ 

“No.” 

“But surely you know that you are taking a dangerous and ugly 
risk.” 

“No.” 

“You do not take into consideration the possibility of being . . . 
misunderstood?” 

“No.” 

L ilhan shook her head in smiling reproach. “Miss Taggart, don't 
you think that this is a case where one cannot at ford to indulge in 
abstract theory, but must consider practical reality?” 

Dagny would not smile “I have never understood what is meant 
by a statement ol that kind.” 

“I mean that your attitude may be highly idealistic --as 1 am sure 
it is but, unfortunately, most people do not share voui lofty frame 
ol mind and will misinterpret your action in the one manner which 
would be most abhorrent to you.” 

“Then the responsibility and the risk will be theirs, not mine.” 

“I admire your . . . no, 1 must not say 'innocence,' but shall 1 say 
‘purity’ 7 You have never thought of it, Lm sure, but life is not as 
straight and logical as . . . as a railroad track. It is regrettable, but 
possible, that your high intentions may lead people to suspect things 
which . . well, which I'm sure you know to be of a sordid and 

scandalous nature.” 

Dagny was looking straight at her, “1 don't.” 

“But you cannot ignore that possibility.” 

“1 do.” Dagny turned to go. 

“Oh, but should you wish to evade a discussion if you have nothing 
to hide?” Dagny stopped. “And if your brilliant — and reckless — 
courage permits you to gamble with your reputation, should you 
ignore the danger to Mr. Rearden?” 

373 



Dagny asked slowly, “What is the danger to Mr. Rearden?” 

“Pm sure you understand me.” 

“I don't.” 

“Oh, but surely it isn’t necessary to be more explicit” 

“It is — if you wish to continue this discussion.” 

Lillian’s eyes went to Reardon’s face, searching for some sign to 
help her decide whether to continue or to stop. He would not help 
her. 

“Miss Taggart,” she said, “1 am not your equal in philosophical 
altitude. I am only an average wife. Please give me that bracelet — 
if you do not wish me to think what I might think and what you 
wouldn’t want me to name.” 

“Mrs. Rearden, is this the manner and place in which you choose 
to suggest that 1 am sleeping with your husband?” 

“Certainty not!” The cry was immediate; it had a sound of panic 
and the quality of an automatic reflex, like the jerk of withdrawal 
of a pickpocket’s hand caught in action. She added, with an angry, 
nervous chuckle, in a tone of sarcasm and sincerity that confessed a 
reluctant admission of her actual opinion, “That would be the possi- 
bility farthest from my mind.” 

“Then you will please apologize to Miss Taggart,” said Rearden. 

Dagny caught her breath, cutting off all but the faint echo of a 
gasp. They both whirled to him. Lillian saw nothing in his face; 
Dagny saw torture. 

“It isn’t necessary-. Hank,” she said. 

“It is — for me.” he answered coldly, not looking at her; he was 
looking at Lillian in the manner of a command that could not be 
disobeyed. 

Lillian studied his face with mild astonishment, but without anxiety 
or anger, like a person confronted by a puzzle of no significance. 
“But of course,” she said complaisantly, her voice smooth and con- 
fident again. “Please accept my apology. Miss Taggart, if 1 gave you 
the impression that I suspected the existence of a relationship which 
l would consider improbable for you and — from my knowledge of 
his inclinations — impossible for my husband.” 

She turned and walked away indifferently, leaving them together, 
as if in deliberate proof of her words 

Dagny stood still, her eyes closed; she was thinking of the night 
when Lillian had given her the bracelet. He had taken his wife’s 
side, then; he had taken hers, now. Of the three of them, she was 
the only one who understood fully what this meant. 

“Whatever is the worst you may wish to say to me, you will be 
right.” 

"She heard him and opened her eyes. He was looking at hjer coldly, 
his face harsh, allowing no sign of pain or apology to suggest a hope 
of forgiveness. 

“Dearest, don’t torture yourself like that,” she said. “I knew that 
you’re married. I’ve never tried to evade that knowledge! I’m not 
hurt by 1 1 tonight.” f 

Her first word was the most violent of the several blows he felt; 
she had never used that word before. She had never let him hear 

374 



that partiqilar tone of tenderness. She had never spoken of his mar- 
riage in the privacy of their meetings— yet she spoke of it here with 
effortless simplicity. 

She saw the anger in his face — the rebellion against pity— the look 
of saying to her contemptuously that he had betrayed no torture and 
needed no help — then the look of realization that she knew his face 
as thoroughly as he knew hers — he dosed his eyes, inclined his head 
a little, and he said very quietly, "Thank you.” 

She smiled and turned away from him. 

James Taggart held an empty champagne glass in his hand and 
noticed the haste with which Balph Eubank waved at a passing 
waiter, as if the waiter were guilty of an unpardonable lapse. Then 
Eubank completed his sentence: 

“ — but you, Mr. Taggart, would know that a man who lives on a 
higher plane cannot be understood or appreciated. It’s a hopeless 
struggle— trying to obtain support for literature from a world ruled 
by businessmen. They are nothing but stuffy, middle-class vulgarians 
or else predatory savages like Rearden.” 

"Jim,” said Bertram Scudder, slapping his shoulder, "the best com- 
pliment 1 can pay you is that you're not a real businessman!” 

"You’re a man of culture, Jim,” said Dr. Pritchett, "you're not an 
cx-ore -digger like Rearden. 1 don't have to explain to you the crucial 
need of Washington assistance to higher education.” 

"You really liked my last novel, Mr. Taggart?” Balph Eubank 
kept asking. “You really liked it?” 

Orren Boyle glanced at the group, on his way across the room, 
but did not stop. The glance was sufficient to give him an estimate 
of the nature ot the group’s concerns. Fair enough, he thought, one's 
got to trade something. He knew, but did not care to name just what 
was being traded. 

“ We are at the dawn of a new age,” said James Taggart, from 
above the rim of his champagne glass. "We are breaking up the 
vicious tyianny of economic power. We will set men free of the rule 
of the dollar. We will release our spiritual aims from dependence on 
the owners of material means. We will liberate our culture from the 
stranglehold of the profit -chasers We will build a society dedicated 
to higher ideals, and we will replace the aristocracy of money by — ” 

" — the aristocracy of pull,” said a voice beyond the group. 

They whirled around. The man who stood facing them was Fran- 
cisco d’Anconia. 

His face looked tanned by a summer sun, and his eyes were the 
exact color of the sky on the kind of day when he had acquired his 
tan. His smile suggested a summer morning. The way he wore his 
formal clothes made the rest of the crowd look as if they were 
masquerading in borrowed costumes. 

"What’s the matter?” he asked in the midst of their silence. “Did 
I say something that somebody here didn’t know?” 

“How did you get here?” was the first thing James Taggart found 
himself able to utter. 

“By plane to Newark, by taxi from there, then by elevator from 
my suite fifty-three floors above you.” 

375 



“I didn't mean . . . that is, what I meant was — ” 

“Don't look so startled, James. If 1 land in New York and hear 
that there’s a party going on, I wouldn’t miss it, would I? You've 
always said that Fm just a party hound/’ 

The group was watching them. 

“I’m delighted to see you, of course,’’ Taggart said cautiously, then 
added belligerently, to balance it, “But if you think you’re going 
to— ’ 

Francisco would not pick up the threat; he let Taggart’s sentence 
slide into mid-air and slop, then asked politely, “If I think what?” 

“You understand me very well.” 

“Yes. I do. Shall l tell you what I think 7 ” 

“This is hardly the moment for any — ” 

“I think you should present me to your bride, James. Your man- 
ners have never been glued to you too solidly — yoi* always lose them 
in an emergency, and that’s the time when one needs them most.” 

Turning to escort him toward Cherry 1, Taggart caught the faint 
sound that came from Bertram Scudder; it was an unborn chuckle. 
Taggart knew that the men who had crawled at his feet a moment 
ago, whose hatred for Francisco d’Anconia was, perhaps, greater 
than his own, were enjoying the spectacle none the less. The implica- 
tions of this knowledge were among the things he did not care to 
name. 

Francisco bowed to Cherryl and offered his best wishes, as if she 
were the bride of a royal heir. Watching nervously, Taggart fell re- 
lief — and a touch of nameless resentment, which, if named, would 
have told him he wished the occasion deserved the grandeur that 
Francisco’s manner gave it for a moment. 

He was afraid to remain by Francisco’s side and afraid to let him 
loose among The guests. He backed a few tentative steps away, but 
Francisco followed him, smiling. 

“You didn’t think I’d want to miss your wedding, James — when 
you’re my childhood friend and best stockholder?” 

“ What ?” gasped Taggart, and regretted it: the sound was a confes- 
sion of panic. 

Francisco did not seem to take note of it; he said, his voice gaily 
innocent, “Oh, but of course I know it. I know the stooge behind 
the stooge behind every name on the list of the stockholders of 
d’Anconia Copper. It’s surprising how many men by the name of 
Smith and Gomez are rich enough to own big chunks of the richest 
corporation in the world — so you can’t blame me if I was curious to 
learn what distinguished persons I actually have among my minority 
stockholders. I seem to be popular with an astonishing collection of 
public figures from all over the world— from People’s States where 
you wouldn’t think there’s any money left at all.” 

Taggart said dryly, frowning, “There are many reason#*— business 
reasons — why it is sometimes advisable not to make oijie’s invest- 
ments directly.” 

“One reason is that a man doesn’t want people to kno^ he’s rich. 
Another is that he doesn’t want them tp learn how he got that way.” 

“I don’t know what you mean or why you should objtfct.” 

376 



“Oh, 1 don’t object at all. I appreciate it. A great many investors — 
the old-fashioned sort — dropped me after the San Sebastian Mines. 
It scared them away. But the modern ones had more faith m me and 
acted as they always do — on faith. I can’t tell you how thoroughly l 
appreciate it.” 

Taggart wished Francisco would not talk so loudly: he wished peo- 
ple would not gather around them. “You have been doing extremely 
well,” he said, in the safe tone of a business compliment. 

“Yes, haven’t 1? It’s wonderful how the stock of d'Anconia Chop- 
per has risen within the last year. But I don’t think I should be too 
conceited about it — there’s not much competition left in the world, 
theie’s no place to invest one's money, if one happens to get rich 
quickly, and here's d'Anconia Copper, the oldest company on earth, 
the one that’s been the safest bet for centuries. Just think of what 
it managed to survive through the ages. So d you people have de- 
cided that it’s the best place lor your hidden money, that it can't be 
beaten, that it would take a most unusual kind oi man to destroy 
d'Anconia Copper— -you were right." 

“Well, 1 hear it said that you've begun to take your responsibilities 
seriously and that you’ve settled down to business at last. 'They say 
you've been working very hard.” 

“Oh, has anybody noticed that? It was the old-lashioned investors 
who made it a point to watch what the president ol a company was 
doing The modern investors don’t tind knowledge necessary, 1 don't 
think they ever look into my activities ” 

Taggart smiled. “They look at the ticker tape ot the stock ex- 
change. I hat tells the whole story, doesn’t it?” 

“Yes. Yes, it does— in the long run.” 

“1 must say I'm glad that you haven't been much ot a party hound 
this past year. The results show in your work.” 

“Do they? Well, no, not quite yet.” 

“I suppose,” said Taggart, in the cautious tone of an indirect ques- 
tion, “that 1 should feet Haltered you chose to come to this party.” 

“Oh, but I had to come l thought you were expecting me.” 

“Why, no, 1 wasn’t . . . that is, 1 mean — ” 

“You should have expected me, James. This is the great, formal, 
nose-counting event, where the victims come in order to show how 
sale it is to destroy them, and the destroyers form pacts of eternal 
friendship, which lasts for three months. I don’t know exactly which 
group 1 belong to, but 1 had to come and be counted, didn’t 1?” 

“What in hell do you think you're saying?” Taggait cried furiously, 
seeing the tension on the faces around them. 

“Be careful, James. If you try to pretend that you don’t understand 
me, I’m going to make it much clearer.” 

“If you think it's proper to utter such—” 

“I think it’s funny There was a time when men were afraid that 
somebody would reveal some secret of theirs that was unknown to 
their fellows. Nowadays, they’re afraid that somebody will name 
what, eve?*ybody knows. Have you practical people ever thought that 
that's all it would take to blast your whole, big, complex structure. 

377 



with aJI your laws and guns — just somebody naming the exact nature 
of what you're doing?” 

“If you think it’s proper to come to a celebration such as a wed- 
ding, in order to insult the host — ” 

“Why, James, 1 came here to thank you." 

“To thank me?” 

“Of course. You’ve done me a great favor — you and your boys in 
Washington and the boys in Santiago. Only I wonder why none of 
you took the trouble to inform me about it. Those directives that 
somebody issued here a few months ago are choking off the entire 
copper industry of this country. And the result is that this country 
suddenly has to import much larger amounts of copper. And where 
in the world is there any copper left — unless it's d’Anconia copper? 
So you see that I have good reason to be grateful.” 

“1 assure you I had nothing to do with it,” Taggart said hastily, 
“and besides, the vital economic policies of this country are not 
determined by any considerations such as you're intimating or—” 

“I know how they're determined, James. I know that the deal 
started with the boys in Santiago, because they've been on the d’An- 
conia pay roll for centuries —well, no. "pay roll’ is an honorable word, 
it would be more exact to say that d'Anconia Copper has been pay- 
ing them protection money for centuries — isn’t that what your gang- 
sters call it? Our boys m Santiago call it taxes. They've been getting 
their cut on every ton of d'Anconia copper sold. So they have a 
vested interest to see me sell as many tons as possible. But with the 
world turning into People's States this is the only country left where 
men are not yet reduced to digging for roots in forests for their 
sustenance — so this is the only market left on earth. The boys in 
Santiago wanted to corner this market. I don't know what they of- 
fered to the boys in Washington, or who traded what and to whom- 
but I know that you came in on it somewhere, because you do hold 
a sizable chunk of d'Anconia Copper stock. And it surely didn’t 
displease Jou — that morning, four months ago, the day after the 
directives were issued — to see the kind ot soaring leap that d’An- 
conia Copper performed on the Stock Exchange. Why, it practically 
leaped off the ticker tape and into your face.” 

“Who gave you anv grounds to invent an outrageous story of 
this kind?” 

“Nobody. I knew nothing about it. 1 just saw the leap on the ticker 
tape that morning. That told the whole story, didn’t it? Besides, the 
boys in Santiago slapped a new tax on copper the following week — 
and they told me that 1 shouldn’t mind, not with the sudden rise of 
my stock. They were working for my best interests, they said. They 
said, why should i care — taking the two events together, I was richer 
than I had been before. True enough. 1 was.” 

“Why do you wish to tell me this?” • 

“Why don’t you wish to take any credit for it, James'! That's out 
of character and out of the policy at which you're sucty an expert. 
In an age when men exist, not by right, but by favor, ohe does not 
reject a grateful person, one tries to trap into gratitude as many 

378 



people as possible. Don’t you want to have me as one of your men 
under obligation?” 

‘i don’t know what you’re talking about.” 

“Think what a favor I received without any effort on my part. I 
wasn’t consulted, I wasn’t informed, I wasn’t thought about, every- 
thing was arranged without me — and all I have to do now is produce 
the copper. That was a great favor, James*— and you may be sure 
that I will repay it." 

Francisco turned abruptly, not waiting for an answer, and started 
away. Taggart did not follow; he stood, feeling that anything was 
preferable to one more minute of their conversation. 

Francisco stopped when he came to Dagny. He looked at her for 
a silent instant, without greeting, his smile acknowledging that she 
had been the first person he saw and the first one to see him at his 
entrance into the ballroom. 

Against every doubt and warning in her mind, she felt nothing but 
a joyous confidence; inexplicably, she felt as if his figure in that 
crowd was a point of indestructible security. But in the moment 
when the beginning of a smile told him how glad she was to see 
him, he asked, “Don't you want to tell me what a brilliant achieve- 
ment the John (jalt Line turned out to be?” 

She felt her lips trembling and tightening at once, as she answered, 
“I'm sorry if I show that Fm still open to be hurt. It shouldn't shock 
me that you’ve come to the stage where you despise achievement.” 

“Yes, don’t I? I despise that Line so much that 1 didn’t want to 
see it reach the kind of end it has reached.” 

He saw her look of sudden attentiveness, the look of thought 
ruling into a breach torn open upon a new direction. He watched 
hci for a moment, as if he knew every step she would tind along 
that load, then chuckled and said. “Don't you want to ask ine now: 
Who is John Galt?” 

“Why should 1 want to. and why now?" 

“Don’t you remember that you dared him to come and claim your 
l ine? Well, he has.” 

He walked on, not waiting to see the look in her eyes— a look 
that held anger, bewilderment and the first faint gleam of a ques* 
non mark. 

It was the muscles of his own face that made Rcardcn realize the 
nature of his reaction to Francisco's arrival; he noticed suddenly that 
he was smiling and that his face had been relaxed into the dim well- 
being of a smile for some minutes past, as he watched Francisco 
d'Anconia in the crowd. 

He acknowledged to himself, for the first time, all the half-grasped, 
halt-rejected moments when he had thought of Francisco d'Anconia 
and thiust the thought aside before it became the knowledge of how 
much he wanted to see him again. In moments of sudden exhaus- 
tion— al his desk, with the fires of the furnaces going down in the 
twilight— in the darkness of the lonely walk through the empty coun- 
tryside to his house — in the silence of sleepless nights — he had found 
himself thinking of the only man who had once seemed to be his 
spokesman. He had pushed the memory aside, telling himself: But 

379 



that one is worse than all the others! — while feeling certain that this 
was not true, yet being unable to name the reason of his certainty. 
He had caught himself glancing through the newspapers to see 
whether Francisco d’Anconia had returned to New York — and he 
had thrown the newspapers aside, asking himself angrily: What if he 
did return? — would you go chasing him through night dubs and 
cocktail parties?— what is it that you want from him? 

This was what he had wanted — he thought, when he caught himself 
smiling at the sight of Francisco in the crowd — this strange leeling 
of expectation that held curiosity, amusement and hope. 

Francisco did not seem to have noticed him. Rearden waited, 
fighting a desire to approach; not after the kind of conversation we 
had. he thought — what for?— what would l say to him? And then, 
with the same smiling, light-hearted feeling, the feeling of being cer- 
tain that it was right, he found himself walking across the ballroom, 
toward the group that surrounded Francisco d’Anconia. 

He wondered, looking at them, why these people were drawn to 
Francisco, why they chose to hold him imprisoned in a clinging circle, 
when their resentment of him was obvious under their smiles. Their 
faces had the hint of a look peculiar, not to fear, but to cowardice: 
a look of guilty anger. Francisco stood cornered against the side 
edge of a marble stairway, half-leaning, half-sitting on the steps; the 
informality of his posture, combined with the strict formality of his 
clothes, gave him an air of superlative elegance. His was the only 
face that had the carefree look and the brilliant smile proper to the 
enjoyment of a party: but his eyes seemed intentionally expression- 
less, holding no trace of gaiety, showing — like a warning signal - 
nothing but the activity of a heightened perceptiveness. 

Standing unnoticed on the edge ot the group. Rearden heard a 
woman, who had large diamond earrings and a flabby, nervous face, 
ask tensely, “Senor d’Anconia, what do you think is going to happen 
to the world?” 

“Just exactly what it deserves.” 

“Oh, how cruel!” 

“Don't you believe in the operation of the moral law. madame?” 
Francisco asked gravely. ‘1 do.” 

Rearden heard Bertram. Scudder, outside the group, say to a girl 
who made some sound of indignation, “Don't let him disturb you. 
You know, money is the root of all evil- -and he’s the typical product 
of money.” 

Rearden did not think that Francisco could have heard it, but he 
saw Francisco turning to them with a gravely courteous smile. 

“So you think that money is the root of all evil?” said Francisco 
d’Anconia. “Have you ever asked what is the root of money? Money 
is a tool of exchange, which can’t exist unless there arfe goods pro- 
duced and men able to produce them. Money is the material shape 
of the principle that men who wish to deal with one ^nother must 
deal by trade and give value for value. Money is not ttye tool of the 
moochers, who claim your product by tears, or of the} looters, who 
take it from you by force. Money is made possible only by the men 
who produce Is this what you consider evil? 

380 



“When you accept money in payment for your effort, you do so 
only on the conviction that you will exchange it for the product of 
the effort of others. It is not the moochers or the looters who give 
value to money. Not an ocean of tears nor all the guns in the world 
can transform those pieces of paper in your wallet into the bread 
you will need to survive tomorrow. Those pieces of paper, which 
should have been gold, are a token of honor— your claim upon the 
energy of the men who produce. Your wallet is your statement of 
hope that somewhere in the world around you there are men who 
will not default on that moral principle which is the root of money. 
Is this what you consider evil? 

“Have you ever looked for the root of production? Take a look 
at an electric generator and dare tell yourself that it was created by 
the muscular effort of unthinking brutes. Try to grow a seed of wheat 
without the knowledge left to you by men who had to discover it 
for the first time Try to obtain your food by means o l nothing but 
physical motions — and you’ll learn that man’s mind is the root of 
all the goods produced and of all the wealth that has ever existed 
on earth. 

“But you say that money is made by the strong at the expense of 
the weak? What strength do you mean 0 It is not the strength of 
guns or muscles. Wealth is the product of man's capacity to think. 
Then is money made by the man who invents a motor at the expense 
of those who did not invent it 0 Is money made by the intelligent at 
the expense of the fools? By the able at the expense of the incompe- 
tent? By the ambitious at the expense of the lazy? Money is made — 
before it can be looted or mooched — made by the effort of every 
honest man, each to the extent of his ability. An honest man is one 
who knows that he can’t consume more than he has produced. 

“To trade by means of money is the code of the men of good will. 
Money rests on the axiom that every man is the owner of his mind 
and his effort. Money allows no power to prescribe the value of your 
effort except the voluntary choice of the man who is willing to trade 
you his effort in return. Money permits you to obtain for your goods 
and your labor that which they are worth to the men who buy them, 
but no more. Money permits no deals except those to mutual benefit 
by the unforced judgment of the traders. Money demands of you the 
recognition that men must work lor their own benefit, not for their 
own injury, for their gain, not their loss— the recognition that they 
are not beasts of burden, born to carry the weight of your misery — 
that you must offer them values, not wounds— that the common 
bond among men is not the exchange of suffering, but the exchange 
of goods. Money demands that you sell, not your weakness to men’s 
stupidity, but your talent to their reason; it demands that you buy, 
not the shoddiest they offer, bill the best that your money can find. 
And when men live by trade - with reason, not force, as their final 
arbiter — it is the best product that wins, the best performance, the 
man of best judgment and highest ability- and the degree of a man’s 
productiveness is the degree of his reward. This is the code of exis- 
tence* whose tool and symbol is money. Is this what you consider 
evil? 


381 



“But money is only a tool. It will take you wherever you wish, 
but it will not replace you as the driver, ft will give you the means 
for the satisfaction of your desires, but it will not provide you with 
desires. Money is the scourge ot the men who attempt to reverse 
the law of causality —the men who seek to replace the mind by 
seizing the products of the mind. 

•'Money will not purchase happiness for the man who has no con- 
cept of what he wants: money will not give him a code of values, if 
he’s evaded the knowledge of what to value, and it will not provide 
him with a purpose, if he’s evaded the choice of what to seek. Money 
will not buy intelligence for the fool, or admiration for the coward, 
or respect for the incompetent. The man who attempts to purchase 
the brains of his superiors to serve him, with his money replacing 
his judgment, ends up by becoming the victim of hts inferiors I he 
men of intelligence desert him. but the cheats and the frauds come 
flocking to him, drawn by a law which he has not discovered: that 
no man may be smaller than his money. Is this the reason why you 
call it evil? 

“Only the man who does not need it, is lit to inherit wealth- the 
man who would make his own fortune no mallei where he started. 
If an heir is equal to his money, it serves him: if not, it destroys him 
But you look on and you cry that money corrupted him. Did it'* Or 
did he corrupt his money? Do not envy a worthless heir: his wealth 
is not yours and you would have done no better with it Do not 
think that it should have been distributed among you: loading the 
world with fifty parasites instead of one, would not bring back the 
dead virtue which was the fortune Money is a living power that dies 
without its root. Money will not servo the mind that cannot match 
it. Is this the reason why you call it evil? 

“Money is your means of survival The verdict you pronounce 
upon the source of youi livelihood is the verdict vou pronounce upon 
your tile. If the source is corrupt, you have damned your own exis- 
tence. Did you get your money by fraud? By pandenng to men's 
vices or men's stupidity? By catering to tools, in the hope ot getting 
more than your ability deserves? By lowering your standards? Bv 
doing work you despise for purchasers you scorn? If so, then your 
money will not give you a moment's or a penny's worth of joy. Then 
all the things you buy will become, not a tribute to you, but a re- 
proach; not an achievement, but a reminder ot shame Then you’ll 
scream that money is evil. Lvil. because it would not pinch-hit tor 
your self-respect? Fivil, because it would not let you enjoy your de- 
pravity? Is this the root of your hatred ot money? 

“Money will always remain an effect and refuse to replace you as 
the cause. Money is the product ol virtue, but it will nof give you 
virtue and it will not redeem your vices. Money will note give you 
the unearned, neither in matter nor in spirit. Is this the ropt of your 
hatred of money ? 

“Or did you say it's the love of money that's the root <if all evil? 
To love a thing is to know and love its nature. To love money is to 
know and love the fact that money is the creation of the West power 
within you, and your passkey to trade your effort for th<i effort of 

3H2 



the best among men. It’s the person who would sell his soul for a 
nickel, who is loudest in proclaiming his haired of money— and he 
has good reason to hate it. The lovers of money are willing to work 
for it. 'lltey know they are able to deserve it. 

“Let me give you a tip on a clue to men’s characters: the man who 
damns money has obtained it dishonorably; the man who respects it 
has earned it. 

“Run for your life Ironi any man who tells you that money is evil. 
That sentence is the leper’s bell of an approaching looter. So long 
as men live together on earth and need means to deal with one 
another — their only substitute, if they abandon money, is the muzzle 
of a gun. 

“But money demands of you the highest virtues, if you wish to 
make it or to keep it. Men who have no courage, pride or self- 
esteem, men who have no moral sense ot their right to their money 
and are not willing to defend it as they defend their life, men who 
apologize for being rich — will not remain rich lor long. Hiey are the 
natural bait for the swarms of looters that stay under rocks for centu- 
ries, but come crawling out at the first smell of a man who begs to 
be torgiven for the guiit of owning wealth. They will hasten to relieve 
him of the guilt — and of his life, as he deserves. 

“Then you will see the rise of the men of the double standard — 
the men who live by force, yet count on those who live by trade to 
create the value ot their United money— the men who are the hitch- 
hikers of virtue. In a moral society, these are the criminals, and the 
statutes are written to protect you against them. But when a society 
establishes crimmals-hy right and looters-by-law — men who use force 
to seize the wealth of disarmed victims— then money becomes its 
crealois* avenger. Such looters believe it safe to rob defenseless men, 
once they’ve passed a law to disarm them. But their loot becomes 
the magnet for other looters, who get it from them as they got it. 
Then the race goes, not to the ablest at production, but to those 
most ruthless at brutality. When torce is the standard, the murderer 
wins over the pickpocket. And then that society vanishes, in a spread 
ui ruins and slaughter. 

“Do you wish to know whether that day is coming? Watch money. 
Money is the barometer ot a society's virtue. When you see that 
trailing is done, not by consent, but by compulsion —when you see 
dial in order to produce, you need to obtain permission Irom men 
who produce nothing-' when you see that money is ilowing to those 
who deal, not in goods, but in favors — when you see that men get 
richer by graft and by pull than by work, and your laws don’t protect 
><>u against them, but protect them against you —when you see cor* 
ruption being rewarded and honesty becoming a self -sacrifice — you 
may know that your society is doomed. Money is so noble a medium 
that it does not compete with guns and tt does not make terms with 
brutality. It will not permit a country to survive as half-property, 
half-loot. 

‘Whenever destroyers appear among men, they start by destroying 
money, for money is men’s protection and the base of a moral exis- 
tence. Destroyers seize gold and leave to its owners a counterfeit 

383 



pile of paper. This kills all objective standards and delivers men into 
the arbitrary power of an arbitrary setter of values. Gold was an 
objective value, an equivalent of wealth produced. Paper is a mort- 
gage on wealth that dt>es not exist, backed by a gun aimed at those 
who are expected to produce it. Paper is a check drawn by legal 
looters upon an account which is not theirs: upon the virtue of the 
victims. Watch for the day when it bounces, marked: 'Account 
overdrawn/ 

''When you have made evil the means of survival, do not expect 
men to remain good. Do not expect them to stay moral and lose 
their lives for the purpose of becoming the fodder of the immoral. 
Do not expect them to produce, when production is punished and 
looting rewarded. Do not ask, 'Who is destroying the world?’ You 
are, 

"You stand in the midst of the greatest achievements of the great- 
est productive civilization and you wonder why it's crumbling around 
you, while you’re damning its life-blood — money You look upon 
money as the savages did before you, and you wonder why the jungle 
is creeping back to the edge of your cities. Throughout men’s history, 
money was always seized by looters of one brand or another, whose 
names changed, but whose method remained the same: to seize 
wealth by force and to keep the producers bound, demeaned, de- 
famed, deprived of honor. That phtase about the evil of money, 
which you mouth with such righteous recklessness, comes lrom a 
time when wealth was produced by the labor of slaves- -slaves who 
repeated the motions once discovered by somebody’s mind and lelt 
unimproved for centuries. So long as production was ruled by force, 
and wealth was obtained by conquest, there was little to conquer 
Yet through all the centuries of stagnation and starvation, men ex- 
alted the looters, as aristocrats of the sword, as aristocrats of birth, 
as aristocrats of the bureau, and despised the producers, as slaves, 
as traders^ as shopkeepers— as industrialists. 

“To the glory of mankind, there was. for the first and only time 
in history, a country of money —and 1 have no higher, more reverent 
tribute to pay to America, for this means: a country of reason. justice, 
freedom, production, achievement. For the first time, man’s mind 
and money were set free, and there were no fortunes-by-conqucst, 
but only fortunes-by-work. and instead of swordsmen and slaves, 
there appeared the real maker of wealth, the greatest worker, the 
highest type of human being — the self-made man—the American 
industrialist. 

"If you ask me to name the proudest distinction of Americans, I 
would choose —because it contains all the others— the fact that the\ 
were the people who created the phrase ‘to make mone^.’ No other 
language or nation had ever used these words before; pen had al 
ways thought of wealth as a static quantity — to be seized, begged, 
inherited, shared, looted or obtained as a favor, Americans were the 
first to understand that wealth has to be created. The words 'to make 
money" hold the essence of human morality, 

“Yet these were the words for which Americans were denounced 
by the rotted cultures of the looters’ continents. Now>the looters' 
' 384 



credo has brought you to regard your proudest achievements as a 
hallmark of shame, your prosperity as guilt, your greatest men, the 
industrialists, as blackguards, and your magnificent lactones as the 
product and property of muscular labor, the labor of whip-driven 
slaves, like the pyramids of Egypt The rotter who simpers that he 
sees no difference between the power of the dollar and the power 
of the whip, ought to learn the difference on his own hide — as, 1 
think, he will. 

’"Until and unless you discover that money is the root of all good, 
you ask for youi own destruction. When money ceases to be the 
tool by which men deal with one another, then men become the 
tools of men. Blood, whips and guns— or dollars. l ake your choice— 
there is no other -and your lime is running out." 

Francisco had not glanced at Rearden once while speaking; but 
the moment he finished, his eyes went straight to Kcarden's face. 
Rearden stood motionless, seeing nothing but Francisco d'Anconia 
across the moving figures and angry voices between them. 

There weie people who had listened, but now hurried away, and 
people who said, “It’s horrible!"— ’it's not true!" -""How vicious 
and selfish!" -saying it loudly and guardedly at once, as if wishing 
that their neighbors would hear them, but hoping that Francisco 
would not. 

"Seiior d’Anconia," declared the woman with the earrings, "I 
don’t agree with you!" 

V I( you can retule a single sentence 1 ulleicd, madame, 1 shall 
heat it gratefully." 

“Oh. I can't answer you I don’t have any answers, my mind 
doesn't work that way, but I don’t feel that you're riaht, so I know 
that you’ie wrong." 

“flow do you know it?" 

"I Jed it. \ don’t go by my head, but by my heart. You might be 
good at logic, but you're heartless." 

"Madame, when we ll see men dying of starvation around us. your 
heart won't be of any earthly use to save them. And I'm heartless 
enough to say that when you'll scream, ‘but I didn't know it!' — you 
will not be forgiven." 

The woman turned away, a shudder running through the tksh of 
her cheeks and through the angry tremor of her voice; "Well, it's 
certainly a funny way to talk at a parly!" 

A portly man with evasive eyes said loudly, his tone of forced 
cheerfulness suggesting that his stile concern in any issue was not to 
let it become unpleasant, "If this is the way you feel about money, 
sertor, 1 think I’m darn glad that I’ve got a goodly piece of d'Anconia 
Topper stock." 

Francisco said gravely, "l suggest that you think twice, sir." 

Rearden started toward him — and Francisco, who had not seemed 
h> look in his dilection, moved to meet him at once, as if the others 
had never existed. 

"Hello,” said Reatden simply, easily, as to a childhotxl friend; he 
was smiling. 

He saw his own smile reflected in Francisco’s face. "Hello." 

385 



“I want to speak to you.” 

"To whom do you think I’ve been speaking for the last quarter 
of an hour?*’ 

Rearden chuckled, in the manner of acknowledging an opponent’s 
round, ‘l didn't think you had noticed me." 

“I noticed, when I came in, that you were one of the only two 
persons in this room who were glad to see me." 

"Aren't you being presumptuous?" 

"No — grateful." 

"Who was the other person glad to see you?" 

Francisco shrugged and said lightly, “A woman " 

Rearden noticed that Francisco had led him aside, away from the 
group, in so skillfully natural a manner that neither he nor the otheis 
had known it was being done intentionally. 

"1 didn’t expect to find you here," said Francisco. "You shouldn’t 
have come to this party." 

"Why not?" 

"May 1 ask what made you come?" 

“My wife was anxious to accept the invitation " 

“Forgive me it I put it in such form, but it would have been much 
more proper and less dangerous if she had asked you to take her 
on a tour of whorehouses." 

"What danger are you talking about?” 

"Mr. Rearden, you do not know these people's way of doing busi 
ness or how they interpret your presence here In your code, but not 
in theirs, accepting a man's hospitality is a token of good will, a 
declaration that you and your host stand on terms of a civilized 
relationship. Don't give them that kind ot sanction." 

“Then why did you come here?" 

Francisco shrugged gaily. ‘‘Ob. f — it doesn't matter what I do. Tm 
only a parly hound." 

"What are you doing at this party?” 

"Just looking for conquests." 

"Found any?" 

His face suddenly earnest. Francisco answered gravely, almost sol- 
emnly, “Yev— ■ what I think is going to be my best and greatest." 

Rearden's anger was involuntary, the cry, not of reproach, but of 
despair: "How can you waste yourself that way*" 

The faint suggestion of a smile, like the rise of a distant light, 
came into Francisco’s eyes as he asked, "Do you care to admit that 
you care about it?" 

“You’re going to hear a few more admissions, if that’s what you’re 
after. Before I met you, 1 used to wonder how you could waste a 
fortune such as yours. Now it’s worse, because 1 can’t .despise you 
as I did, as I’d like to, yet the question is much more terrible: How 
Can you waste a mind such as yours?" 

"1 don’t think Fm wasting it right now." 

"I don't know whether there’s ever been anything that meant a 
damn to you — but I’m going to tell you what I’ve ifever said to 
anyone before. When I met you, do you remember tjiat you said 
you wanted to offer me your gratitude?" 

386 



There was no trace of amusement left in Francisco’s eyes; Rearden 
had never faced so solemn a look of respect. “Yes, Mr. Rearden,” 
he answered quietly. 

“1 told you that I didn’t need it and I insulted you for it. All right, 
you’ve won. That speech you made tonight — that was what you were 
offering me, wasn’t it?” 

“Yes, Mr. Rearden.” 

“It was more than gratitude, and 1 needed the gratitude; it was 
more than admiration, and 1 needed that, t<xr, it was much more 
than any word 1 can find, it will take me days to think of all that 
it’s given me — but one thing 1 do knovy: I needed it. I’ve never made 
an admission of this kind, because I’ve never cried for anyone’s help. 
If it amused you to guess that J was glad to see you. you have 
something real to laugh about now. if you wish.” 

“It might take me a few years, but I will prove to you that these 
are the things l do not laugh about ” 

“Prove it now — by answering one question: Why don't you prac- 
tice what you preach'”' 

“Are you sure that 1 don't?” 

“If the things you said are true, if you have the greatness to know 
it, you should have been the leading industrialist of the world by 
now.” 

Francisco said gravely, as he had said to the portly man, but with 
an odd note of gentleness in his voice, “1 suggest that you think 
twice, Mr. Rearden,” 

“I’ve thought about you more than I care to admit. I have found 
no answer.” 

“Let me give you a hint: If the things 1 said are true, who is the 
guiltiest man in this room tonight?” 

“I suppose — James Taggart?” 

“No, Mr, Rearden, it is not James Taggart But you must define 
the guilt and choose the man youiself.” 

“A few years ago, 1 would have said that it’s you. 1 still think that 
that’s what I ought to say. But Pm almost in the position of that 
!ool woman who spoke to you: every reason 1 know tells me that you’re 
guilty— and yet 1 can't feel it ” 

“You are making the same mistake as that woman, Mr. Rearden, 
though in a nobler foim ” 

“What do you mean ”’ 

I mean much more than just your judgment of me. T hat woman 
and all those like her keep evading the thoughts which they know 
to be good. You keep pushing out of your mind the thoughts which 
you believe to be evil. They do it, because they want to avoid effort. 
You do it, because you won't permit yourself to consider anything 
that would spare you. They indulge their emotions at any cost. You 
Mcritice your emotions as the. first cost of any problem. They are 
willing to bear nothing. You are willing to bear anything. They keep 
evading responsibility. You keep assuming it. But don't you see that 
die essential error is the same? Any refusal to recognize reality, for 
any reason whatever, has disastrous consequences. There are no evil 
thoughts except one: the refusal to think. Don’t ignore your own 

387 



desires, Mr. Rearden. Don’t sacrifice them. Examine their cause. 
There is a limit to how much you should have to bear.” 

“How did you know this about me?” 

“I made the same mistake, once. But not for long.” 

”1 wish — ” Rearden began and stopped abruptly. 

Francisco smiled. ‘Afraid to wish, Mr. Rearden?” 

“1 wish 1 could permit myself to like you as much as 1 do.” 

“Fd give — ” Francisco stopped; inexplicably. Rearden saw the look 
of an emotion which he could not define, yet fell certain to be pain; 
he saw Francisco’s first moment of hesitation. “Mr. Rearden, do you 
own any d’Anconia Copper stock?” 

Rearden looked at him, bewildered. “No.” 

“Some day, you’ll know what treason I'm committing right now, 
but . . . Don’t ever buy any d’Anconia Copper stock. Don't ever 
deal with d’Anconia Copper in any way.” 

“Why?” 

“When you’ll learn the lull reason, you’ll know whether there’s 
ever been anything — or anyone- that meant a damn to me. and . . . 
and how much he did mean ” 

Rearden frowned: he had remembered something. “I wouldn’t 
deal with your company. Didn't you call them the men of the double 
standard? Aren’t you one of the looters who is growing rich right 
now by means of directives?” 

Inexplicably, the words did not hit Francisco as an insult, hut 
cleared his face back into his look of assurance. “Did you think that 
it was I who wheedled those directives out of the robber planners?” 

“If not. then who did it *” 

“My hitchhikers.” 

“Without your consent?” 

“Without my knowledge.” 

“I’d hate to admit how much l want to believe you - but there’s 
no way for you to prove it now ” 

“No? HI prove it to you within the next fifteen minutes.” 

“How? The fact remains that you’ve profited the most from 
those directives.” 

“That’s true. I’ve profited more than Mr. Mouch and his gang 
could ever imagine. After my years of work, they gave me just the 
chance 1 needed.” 

“Are you boasting?” 

“You bet I am!” Rearden saw incredulously that Francisco’s eyes 
had a hard, bright look, the look, not of a party hound, but of a 
man of action. “Mr. Rearden. do you know where most of those 
new aristocrats keep their hidden money? Do you know where most 
of the fair-share vultures have invested their profits from Rearden 
Metal?” 

“No, but—” , 

“In d’Anconia Copper stock. Safely out of the way and <>ut of the 
country. D’Anconia Copper- an old, invulnerable company, so rich 
that it would last for three more generations of looting. Accompany 
managed by a decadent playboy who doesn’t give a damm^vho’ll let 
them use his property in any way they please and just cctntinue to 

388 



make money for them — automatically, as did his ancestors. Wasn’t 
that a perfect setup for the looters, Mr, Rearden? Only— what one 
single point did they miss?'’ 

Rearden was staring at him. “What are you driving at?” 

Francisco laughed suddenly, “It's too bad about those profiteers 
on Rearden Metal. You wouldn’t want them to lose the money you 
made for them, would you, Mr. Rearden? But accidents do happen 
in the world — you know what they say, man is only a helpless play- 
thing at the rneicy of nature’s disasters. For instance, there was a 
tire at the d'Anconia ore docks in Valparaiso tomorrow morning, a 
tire that razed them to the ground along with half of the port struc- 
tures. What time is it, Mr. Rearden? Oh, did I mix my tenses? To- 
morrow afternoon, there will be a rock slide in the d’Anconia mines 
at Orano- -no lives lost, no casualties, except the mines themselves. 
It will be found that the mines are done for. because they had been 
worked in the wrong places for months - what can you expect from 
a playboy’s management? The great deposits of copper will be buried 
under tons of mountain where a Sebastian d'Anconia w'uuld not be 
able to reclaim them in less than three years, and a People’s State 
will never reclaim them at all. When the stockholders begin to look 
into things, they will find that the mines at Campos, at San Felix, at 
l as Heras have been worked in exactly the same manner and have 
been running at a loss for over a year, only the playboy juggled the 
books and kept it out of the newspapers. Shalt I tell you what they 
will discover about the management ot the d’Anconia foundries? Or 
of the d’Anconia ore fleet? But all these discoveries won’t do the 
stockholders any good anyway, because the stock of d’Anconia Cop- 
pci wall have crashed tomorrow morning, crashed like an electric 
bulb against concrete, crashed like an express elevator, spattering 
pieces of hitchhikers all over the gutters!” 

The triumphant rise ot Francisco's voice merged with a matching 
sound Rearden burst out laughing 

Rearden did not know how long that moment lasted or what he 
had felt, it had been like a blow hurling him into another kind of 
consciousness, then a second blow returning him to his own — all that 
was left, as at the awakening from a narcotic, was the feeling that 
he had known some immense kind of freedom, never to be matched 
in reality. This was like the Wyatt fire again, he thought, this was 
liis secret danger. 

He found himself backing away from Francisco d’Anconia. Fran- 
cisco stood watching him intently and looked as if he had been 
watching him all through that unknown length of time. 

“There arc no evil thoughts, Mr. Rearden,” Francisco said softly, 
except one: the refusal to think.” 

“No,” said Rearden; it was almost a whisper, he ha<l to keep his 
voice down, he was afraid that he would hear himself scream it, 
‘no . . if this is the key to you. no, don’t expect me to cheer you . . . 
vou didn't have the strength to fight them . . . you chose the easiest, 
most vicious way . . . deliberate destruction. , . the destruction of 
m achievement you hadn’t produced and couldn't match. . . 

“Thai’s not what you’ll read in the newspapers tomorrow. There 

T89 



won't be any evidence of deliberate destruction. Everything hap- 
pened in the normal, explicable, justifiable course of plain incompe- 
tence. Incompetence isn’t supposed to be punished nowadays, is it? 
The boys in Buenos Aires and the boys in Santiago will probably 
want to hand me a subsidy, by way of consolation and reward. 
There’s still a great part of the d'Anconia Copper Company left, 
though a great part of it is gone for good. Nobody will say that I’ve 
done it intentionally. You may think what you wish.” 

”1 think you’re the guiltiest man in this room,” said Rearden qui- 
etly. wearily; even the fire of his anger was gone; he felt nothing but 
the emptiness left by the death of a gTeat hope. ”1 think you’re 
worse than anything 1 had supposed. . . .” 

Francisco looked at him with a strange half-smile of serenity, the 
serenity of a victory over pain, and did not answer. 

It was their silence that let them hear the voices of the two men 
who stood a few steps away, and they turned to look at the speakers. 

The stocky, elderly man was obviously a businessman of the con- 
scientious, unspectacular kind. His formal dress suit was of good 
quality, but of a cut fashionable twenty years before, with the faintest 
tinge of green at the seams; he had had few occasions to wear it. 
His shirt studs were ostentatiously too large, but it was the pathetic 
ostentation of an heirloom, intricate pieces of old-fashioned work- 
manship, that had probably come to him through four generations, 
like his business. His face had the expression which, these days, was 
the mark of an honest man; an expression of bewilderment. He was 
looking at his companion, trying hard -conscientiously, helplessly, 
hopelessly — to understand. 

His companion was younger and shorter, a small man with lumpy 
flesh, with a chest thrust forward and the thin points of a mustache 
thrust up. He was saying, in a tone of patronizing boredom, “Well. 
I don't know All of you are crying about rising costs, it seems to 
be the stock complaint nowadays, it's the usual whine of people 
whose profits are squeezed a little. I don’t know, well have to see. 
we'll have to decide whether we ll permit you to make any profits 
or not.” 

Rearden glanced at Francisco- and saw a face that went beyond 
his conception of what the purity of a single purpose could do to a 
human countenance: it was the most merciless (ace one could ever 
be permitted to see. He had thought of himself as ruthless, but he 
knew that he could not match thus level, naked, implacable look, 
dead to all feeling but justice. Whatever the rest of him- -thought 
Rearden — the man who could experience this was a giant. 

it was only a moment. Francisco turned to him, his face normal, 
and said very quietly, “I’ve changed my mind, Mr. Rearden. I’m glad 
that you came to this party. 1 want you to see this.” * 

Then, raising his voice, Francisco said suddenly, in thf gay, loose, 
piercing lone of a man of complete irresponsibility, “Yoi| won't grant 
me that loan, Mr. Rearden? It puts me on a terrible fipot. 1 must 
get the money — l must raise it tonight — 1 must raise $ before the 
Stock Exchange opens in the morning, because otherwise — ” 

390 



He did not have to continue, because the little man with the mus- 
tache was clutching at his arm. 

Rearden had never believed that a human body could change di- 
mensions within one’s sight, but he saw the man shrinking in weight, 
in posture, in form, as if the air were let out of his lungs, and what 
had been an arrogant ruler was suddenly a piece of scrap that could 
not be a threat to anyone. 

“Is ... is there something wrong, Sehor d’Anconia‘ > I mean, on . . . 
on the Stock Exchange?" 

Francisco jerked his finger to his Ups, with a (lightened glance. 
“Keep quiet," he whispered. "For God’s sake, keep quiet!” 

The man was shaking. “Something’s , . . wrong?" 

“You don’t happen to own any d’Anconia Copper stock, do you?” 
The man nodded, unable to speak. “Oh my, that’s too bad! Well 
listen, I’ll tell you, if you give me your word of honor that you won’t 
repeat it to anyone. You don’t want to start a panic.” 

“Word of honor . . gasped the man. 

“What you’d better do is run to your stockbroker and sell as fast as 
you can —because things haven't been going too well for d'Anconia 
Copper, I’m trying to raise some money, but if I don't succeed, you’ll 
be lucky it you’ll have ten cents on your dollar tomorrow morning — 
oh my! I forgot that you can't reach your stockbroker before tomor- 
row morning— well, it's too bad, but — " 

The man was running across the room, pushing people out of his 
way, like a torpedo shot into the crowd. 

“Watch," said Francisco austerely, turning to Reaidcn. 

The man was lost in the crowd, they could not see him; they could 
not tell to whom he wav selling his secret or whether he had enough 
of his cunning left to make it a trade with those who held favors — 
but they saw the wake of his passage spreading through the room, 
the sudden cuts splitting the crowd, like the first few cracks, then 
like the accelerating branching that runs through a wall about to 
crumble, the streaks of emptiness slashed, not bv a human touch, 
but by the impersonal breath of terror. 

There were the voices abruptly choked off. the pools of silence, 
then sounds of a different nature, the rising, hysterical inflections of 
uselessly repeated questions, the unnatural whispers, a woman’s 
sci earn, the few spaced, forced giggles of those still trying to pretend 
that nothing was happening. 

There were spots of immobility in the motion of the crowd, like 
spreading blotches of paralysis; there was a sudden stillness, as if a 
motor had been cut off; then came the frantic, jerking, purposeless, 
judder less movement of objects bumping down a hill by the blind 
mercy ol gravitation and of every rock they hit on the way. People 
were running out. running to telephones, running to one another, 
clutching or pushing the bodies around them at random. These men, 
the most powerful men m the country, those who held, unanswerable 
lo any power, the power over every man’s food and every man’s 
enjoyment of his span of years on earth — these men had become a 
pile of rubble, clattering in the wind of panic, the rubble left of a 
structure when its key pillar has been cut. 

m 



James Taggart* his face indecent in its exposure of emotions which 
centuries had taught men to keep hidden, rushed up to Francisco 
and screamed, "Is it true?’' 

"Why, James/* said Francisco* smiling, ‘"what’s the matter? Why 
do you seem to be upset? Money is the root of all evil — so I just 
got tired of being evil." 

Taggart ran toward the main exit, yelling something to Orren 
Boyle on the way. Boyle nodded and kept on nodding, with the 
eagerness and humility of an inefficient servant, then darted off in 
another direction. Cherry!, her wedding veil coiling like a crystal 
cloud upon the air, as she ran after him, caught Taggart at the door. 
"Jim, what’s the matter?" He pushed her aside and she fell against 
the stomach of Paul Larkin, as Taggart rushed out. 

Three persons stood immovably still, like three pillars spaced 
through the room, the lines of their sight cutting across the spread of 
the wreckage. Dagny, looking at Francisco- -Francisco and Bearden, 
looking at each other. 


Chapter III WHITE BLACKMAIL 

"What time is it?" 

It’s running out, thought Reardon — but he answered, “I don’t 
know. Not vet midnight," and remembering his wrist watch, added. 
“Twenty of." 

‘Tm going to take a train home." said Lillian. 

He heard the sentence, but it had to wait its turn to enter the 
crowded passages to his consciousness. He sUkxJ looking absently at 
the living room of his suite, a few minutes’ elevator nde away from 
the party. In a moment, he answered automatically, "At this hour?" 

"It’s still early. There are plenty of trains running." 

"You Ye welcome to stay here, of course." 

"No. I think I prefer to go home." He did not argue. "What about 
you, Henry 1 ? Do you intend going home tonight?" 

"No." He added, "i have business appointments here tomorrow." 

"As you wish." 

She shrugged her evening wrap oft her shoulders, caught it on her 
arm and started toward the door of his bedroom, but stopped. 

"1 hate Francisco d’Anconia,” she said tensely. "Why did he have 
to come to that party? And didn’t he know enough to keep his 
mouth shut, at least till tomorrow morning?" He did not answer. 
"It’s monstrous — what he’s allowed to happen to his company. Of 
course, he’s nothing but a rotten playboy— still, a fortune of that si/e 
is a responsibility, there’s a limit to the negligence a man <San permit 
himself!" He glanced at her face: it was oddly tense, the features 
sharpened, making her look older. "He owed a certain (July to his 
stockholders, didn’t he? . . . Didn’t he, Henry?" 

"Do you mind if we don't discuss it?" 

She made a tightening, sidewise movement with her Jips. the equiv- 
alent of a shrug, and walked into the bedroom. 

He stood at the window, looking down at the streaming roofs of 

392 



automobiles* letting his eyes rest on something while his faculty of 
sight was disconnected. His mind was still focused on the crowd in 
the ballroom downstairs and on two figures in that crowd. But as 
his living room remained on the edge ot his vision, so the sense of 
some action he had to perform remained on the edge of his con- 
sciousness. He grasped it for a moment — it was the fact that he had 
to remove his evening clothes— but farther beyond the edge there 
was the teeling of reluctance to undress in the presence of a strange 
woman in his bedroom, and he forgot it again in the next moment. 

Lillian came out, as trimly groomed as she had arrived, the beige 
traveling suit outlining her figure with efficient tightness, the hat 
tilted over half a head ol hair set in waves. She carried her suitcase, 
swinging it a little, as if in demonstration of her ability to carry it. 

He reached over mechanically and took the suitcase out of her 
hand. 

‘What are you doing?'’ she asked. 

‘i ni going to take you to the station ” 

“Like this? You haven't changed your clothes.” 

“It doesn't matter.” 

“You don’t have to escort me !’m quite able to find my own 
way. If you have business appointments tomorrow, you'd better go 
to bed.” 

He did not answer, but walked to the door, held it open for her 
and followed her to the elevator. 

They remained silent when they rode m a taxicab to the station. 
At such moments as he remembered her presence, he noticed that 
she sat efficiently straight, almost flaunting the perfection of her 
poise; she seemed alertly awake and contented, as if she were starting 
out on a purposeful journey of early morning. 

The cab stopped at the entrance to the Taggart Terminal. The 
bright lights Hooding the great glass doorway transformed the late- 
ness of the hour into a sense of active, timeless security. Lillian 
jumped lightly out of the cab, saying, “No, no, you don’t have to 
get out, drive on back. Will you be home for dinner tomorrow — or 
next month?” 

‘i’ll telephone you,” he said. 

She waved her gloved hand at him and disappeared into the lights 
ol the entrance. As the cab started forward, he gave the driver the 
address of Oagny's apartment 

The apartment was dark when he entered, but the door to her 
bedroom was halt-open and he heard her voice saying, “Hello, 
Hank.” 

He walked in, asking. “Were you asleep?” 

“No.” 

He switched on the light. She lay in bed, her head propped by the 
pillow, her hair falling smoothly to her shoulders, as if she had not 
moved for a long time; but her (ace was untroubled. She looked like 
a schoolgirl, with the tailored collar of a pale blue nightgown lying 
severely high at the base of her throat; the nightgown's front was a 
deliberate contrast to the severity, a spread of pale blue embroidery 
that looked luxuriously adult and feminine. 

393 



He sat down on the edge of the bed — and she smiled, noticing 
that the stern formality of his full dress clothes made his action so 
simply, naturally intimate. He smiled in answer. He had come, pre- 
pared to reject the forgiveness she had granted him at the party, as 
one rejects a favor from too generous an adversary. Instead, he 
reached out suddenly and moved his hand over her forehead, down 
the line of her hair, in a gesture of protective tenderness, in the 
sudden feeling of how delicately childlike she was, this adversary 
who had borne the constant challenge of his strength, but who should 
have had his protection. 

“You're carrying so much," he said, “and it’s I who make it harder 
for you . . 

“No, Hank, you don't and you know it.” 

“I know that you have the strength not to let it hurt you. but it's 
a strength 1 have no right to call upon. Yet I do, and I have no 
solution, no atonement to offer. 1 can only admit that I know it and 
that there’s no way J can ask you to forgive me." 

“There’s nothing to forgive.” 

“I had no right to bring her into your presence.” 

“It did not hurt me. Only . 

“Yes?” 

, . only seeing the way you suffered ... was hard to see." 

‘*1 don't think that suffering makes up for anything, but whatever 
1 felt, I didn't sutler enough. It theie's one thing I loathe, it's to 
speak of m> own suffering- -that should be no one’s concern but 
mine. But if you want to know, since you know it already -yes, it 
was hell tor me. And t wish it were worse At least. I'm not letting 
myself get away with it.” 

He said it sternly, without emotion, as an impersonal verdict upon 
himself. She smiled, in amused sadness, she look his hand and 
pressed it to her lips, and shook her head in rejection of the verdict, 
holding her face hidden against his hand. 

“What do yam mean?” he asked softly. 

“Nothing . . ” lhen she raised her head and said firmly “Hank, 
I knew you were married. I knew what I was doing 1 chose to do 
it 'f here's nothing that you owe me, no duty that sou have to 
consider." 

He shook his head slowly, in protest 

“flank, I want nothing from you except what you wish to give me. 
Do you remember that you called me a trader once? 1 want you to 
come to me seeking nothing but your own enjoyment. So long as 
you wish to remain married, whatever your reason. I have no right 
to resent it. My way of trading is to know that the joy you give me 
is paid for by the joy you get Irom me— not by your suffering or 
mine, I don't accept sacrifices and l don’t make them. If you asked 
me for more than you meant to me, l would refuse. If yofti asked 
me to give up the railroad. I'd leave you. If ever the plcasurf of one 
has to be bought by the pain of the other, there better be $o trade 
at all. A trade by which one gains and the other loses is h fraud. 
You don’t do it in business. Hank. Don’t do it m your own life,” 

Like a dim sound track under her words, he was hearing the words 

394 



said to him by Lillian; he was seeing the distance between the two, 
the difference in what they sought from him and from life- 

“Dagny, what do you think of my marriage?” 

“I have no right to think of it.” 

‘'You must have wondered about it” 

“I did . . . before f came to Ellis Wyatt’s house. Not since.” 

‘■You've never asked me a question about it.” 

‘ And won’t.” 

He was silent for a moment, then said, looking straight at her, 
underscoring his first rejection of the privacy she had always granted 
him, ‘There’s one thing I want you to know: I have not touched her 
since . . . Ellis Wyatt’s house ” 

“I’m glad.” 

‘Did you think I could 7 ” 

“I’ve never permitted myself to wonder about that ” 

“Dagny. do you mean that it 1 had, you . . . you’d accept that, 
too?” 

■‘Yes” 

■‘You wouldn’t hate it?” 

“I'd hate it more than I can tell you. But if that were your choice, 

1 would accept it l want you. Hank.” 

He took her hand and raised it to his lips, she tell the moment’s 
struggle m his hod), m the sudden movement with which he came 
down, half collapsing, and let his mouth cling to her shoulder. Then 
he pulled hei forward, he pulled the length of her body in the pale 
blue nightgown to lie stretched acioss his knees, he held it with an 
unsmiling violence, as it in hatred for her words and as it they were 
the words he had most wanted to hear 

He bent his face down to hers and she heard the question that 
had come again and again in the nights of the year behind them, 
always torn out of him involuntarily, always as a sudden break that 
betrayed Ins constant, secret torture: “Who was your first man?” 

She strained back, trying to draw away from him. but he held her. 
“No. Hank," she said, her lace hard. 

Ihe brief, taut movement ol his lips was a smile. “1 know that 
you won’t answer it. but i won't stop asking because that is what 
1 11 never accept.” 

“Ask yourself why you won't accept it.” 

He answered, his hand moving slowly from hei breasts to her 
knees, as if stressing his ownership, and hating it, “Because . . . the 
things you've permitted me to do , . . 1 didn’t think you could, not 
ever, not even for me . . . but to find that you did. and more: that 
>ou had permitted another man, had wanted bun to, had — ” 

“Do you understand what you're saying? That vou ve never ac- 
cepted mv wanting you, either -you’ve never accepted that 1 should 
want you, just as 1 should have wanted him. once.” 

He said, his voice low, “That's true.” 

She tore herself away from him with a brusque, twisting move- 
ment. she stood up, but she stood looking down at him with a faint 
srnilcs and she said softly, “Do you know your only real guilt? With 
the greatest capacity for it, you’ve never learned to enjoy yourself. 

395 



You’ve always rejected your own pleasure too easily. You’ve been 
willing to bear too much.” 

“He said that, too.” 

“Who?” 

“Francisco d’Anconia.” 

He wondered why he had the impression that the name shocked 
her and that she answered an instant too late. “He said that to you?” 

“We were talking about quite a different subject.” 

In a moment, she said calmly. “I saw you talking to him. Which 
one of you was insulting the other, this time?” 

“We weren’t. Dagny, what do you think of him?” 

“I think that he’s done it intentionally — that smash-up we’re in 
for. tomorrow.” 

“1 know' he has. Still, what do you think of him as a person?” 

“I don’t know. I ought to think that he’s the most depraved person 
I’ve ever met.” 

“You ought to? But you don't?” 

"No. I can’t quite make myself feel certain of it.” 

He smiled. “That’s what’s strange about him 1 know' that he’s a 
liar, a loafer, a cheap playboy, the most viciously irresponsible waste 
of a human being 1 ever imagined possible. Yet. when 1 look at him, 
I feel that if ever there was a man to whom l would entrust my life, 
he’s the one.” 

She gasped. “Hank, are you saying that you like him 0 ” 

‘Tin saying that I didn’t know what it meant, to like a man. I 
didn’t know how much I missed it — until I met him.” 

"Good God. Hank, you’ve fallen for him!” 

“Yes— 1 think I have.” He smiled “Why does it frighten you 0 ” 

“Because . . . because 1 think he’s going to hurt you m some 
terrible way . ... and the more you see in him. the harder it will be 
to bear . . . and it will take you a long time to get over it, if ever. . . . 
I feel that I ought to warn you against him. but l can’t — because 
I’m certain of nothing about him, not even whether he’s the greatest 
or the lowest man on earth.” 

“I’m certain of nothing about him-- except that I like him.” 

“But think of what he’s done. It’s not Jim and Boyle that he’s 
hurt, it’s you and me and Ken Danagger and the rest of us, because 
Jim’s gang will merely take it out on us — and it s going to be another 
disaster, like the Wyatt tire.” 

“Yes . . . yes, like the Wyatt fire. But, you know, I don’t think 1 
care too much about that. What’s one more disaster? Everything's 
going anyway, it’s only a question of a little faster or a little slower, 
all that’s left for us ahead is to keep the ship afloat as long as we 
can and then go down with it.” 

“Is that his excuse for himself? Is that what he’s made Vjnu feel?” 

“No Oh, no! That’s the feeling I lose when I speak to 'him. The 
strange thing is what he does make me feel.” 

“What?” 

“Hope.” 

She nodded^ in helpless wonder, knowing that she had fflt it, too. 

“I don’t know why,” he said. “But I look at people and they seem 

3 % 



to be made of nothing but pain. He’s not. You’re not. That terrible 
hopelessness that’s all around us, f lose it only in his presence. And 
here. Nowhere else.” 

She came back to him and slipped down to sit at his feet, pressing 
her face to his knees. “Hank, wc still have so much ahead of us . . . 
and so much right now. . . 

fie looked at the shape of pale blue silk huddled against the black 
of his clothes — he bent down to her - he said, his voice low, “Dagny . . . 
the things I said to you that morning in Ellis Wyatfs house . , . f 
think I was lying to myself.” 

“I know it.” 

* + 

t hrough a gray drizzle of rain, the calendar above the roofs said: 
September 3, and a clock on another tower said: 10:40, as Rearden 
rode back to the Wayne-Falkland Hotel The cab’s radio was spitting 
out shrilly the sounds of a panic-tinged voice announcing the crash 
ot d’Ancoma Copper. 

Rearden leaned wearily against the seat: the disaster seemed to 
he no more than a stale news story read long ago. He felt nothing, 
except an uncomfortable sense of impropriety at finding himself out 
in the morning streets, dressed in evening clothes. He felt no desire 
to return from the world he had left to the world he saw drizzling 
past the windows of the taxi. 

He turned the key in the door of his hotel suite, hoping to get back 
to a desk as fast as possible and have to set' nothing around him. 

They hit his consciousness together: the breakfast table — the door 
to his bedroom, open upon the sight of a bed that had been slept 
in and Lillian’s voice saying, “Good morning. Henry.” 

She sat m an armchair, wearing the suit she had worn yesterday, 
without the jacket 01 hat; her white blouse l(K)ked smugly crisp. 

I here were remnants of a breakfast on the table. She was smoking 
a cigarette, with the air and pose of a long, patient vigil 

As he stood still, she took the time to cross her legs and settle 
down more comfortably, then asked. “Aren't you going to say any- 
thing, Henry?” 

He stood like a man in military uniform at some official proceed- 
ings where emotions could not be permitted to exist. “It is for you 
to speak.” 

“Aren't you going to try to justify yourself?” 

“No.*’ 

“Aren't you going to start begging my forgiveness?” 

“ I here is no reason why you should forgive me. There is nothing 
for me to add. You know the truth. Now it is up to you.” 

She chuckled, stretching, rubbing her shoulder blades against the 
chair’s back, “Didn’t you expect to be caught, sooner or later?” she 
asked. “If a man like you stays pure as a monk for over a year, 
didn’t you think that I might begin to suspect the reason? It's funny, 
though, that that famous brain of yours didn’t prevent you from 
getting caught as simply as this,” She waved at the room, at the 
breakfast table. “I felt certain that you weren’t going to return here, 
last night. And it wasn’t difficult or expensive at all to find out from 

397 



a hotel employee, this morning, that you haven’t spent a night in 
these rooms in the past year.” 

He said nothing. 

‘The man of stainless steel!” She laughed. “The man of achieve- 
ment and honor who’s so much better than the rest of us! Does she 
dance in the chorus or is she a manicurist in an exclusive barber 
shop patronized by millionaires?” 

He remained silent. 

“Who is she, Henry?” 

“I won’t answer that.” 

“I want to know.” 

“You’re not going to.” 

‘Don’t you think it's ridiculous, your playing the part of a gentle- 
man who's protecting the lady’s name — or of any sort of gentleman, 
from now on? Who is she?” 

“1 said l won't answer.” 

She shrugged. “I suppose it makes no difference. There’s only one 
standard type for the one standard purpose. I’ve always known that 
under that ascetic look of yours you were a plain, crude sensualist 
who sought nothing from a woman except an animal satisfaction 
which I pride myself on not having given you. 1 knew that your 
vaunted sense of honor would collapse some day and you would be 
drawn to the lowest, cheapest type of female, just like any other 
cheating husband.” She chuckled “That great admirer of yours. Miss 
Dagny Taggart, was furious at me for the mere hint of a suggestion 
that her hero wasn’t as pure as his stainless, non-corrosive rail And 
she was naive enough to imagine that I could suspect her oi being 
the type men hnd attractive for a relationship m which'- what they 
seek is most notoriously not brains. 1 knew- your real nature and 
inclinations. Didn’t l?” He said nothing. “Do you know' what l think 
of you now?” 

“You have the nght to condemn me in any way you wish.” 

She laughed. “The great man who was so contemptuous -in busi- 
ness- — of weaklings who trimmed corners or fell by the wayside, be- 
cause they couldn’t match his strength ol character and steadfastness 
of purpose! How do you feel about it now?” 

“My feelings need not concern you. You have the right to decide 
what you wish me to do. I will agree to any demand you make, 
except one: don’t ask me to give it up.” 

"Oh, 1 wouldn’t ask you to give it up! I wouldn’t expect you to 
change your nature. This is your true level- under all that self-made 
grandeur of a knight of industry who lose by sheer genius Irom the 
ore mine gutters to finger bowls and white tie! It tits you well, that 
white tie, to come home at eleven o’clock in the morning! You nevet 
rose out of the ore mines, that’s where you belong- -all of you self- 
made princes of the cash register— in the corner saloon orf Saturday 
night, with the traveling salesmen and the dance -hall girls!” 

“Do you wish to divorce me?” , 

“Oh, wouldn’t you tike that! Wouldn't that be a smarl trade to 
pull! Don’t you suppose l know that you’ve wanted to dfvorce me 
since the first month of our marriage?” 

m 



if that is what you thought, why did you stay with roe?” 

She answered severely, “It’s a question you have lost the right 
:> ask.” 

“That's true,” he said, thinking that only one conceivable reason, 
er love tor him, could justify her answer. 

“No, I’m not going to divorce you. Do you suppose that I will 
How your romance with a floozie to deprive me of my home, my 
ame, my social position? 1 shall preserve such pieces of my life as 
can, whatever does not rest on so shoddy a foundation as your 
dehty. Make no mistake about it: I shall never give you a divorce. 
Whether you like it or not, you’re married and you'll stay married.” 
“1 will, if that is what you wish.” 

“And furthermore, I will not consider — incidentally, why don’t you 
it down?” 

He remained standing “Please say what you have to say.” 

“I will not consider anv unofficial divorce, such as a separation, 
'ou may continue your love idyll in the subways and basements 
/here it belongs, but in the eyes of the world I will expect you to 
emember that 1 am Mrs. Henry Reardon. You have always pro- 
laimed such an exaggerated devotion to honesty —now let me see 
ou be condemned to the life of the hypocrite that you really are. 1 
/ill expect you to maintain your residence at the home which is 
fl'tcially yours, but will now be mine.” 

"If you wish ” 

She leaned back loosely, in a manner of untidy relaxation, her legs 
pread apart, her arms resting in two strict parallels on the aims of 
he chair— like a judge who could permit himsell to be sloppy. 

Divorce?” she said, chuckling coldly. “Did you think you’d get 
It as easily as that? Did you think you'd get by at the price of a few 
your millions tossed off as alimony? You’re so used to purchasing 
/hatever \ou wish by the simple means of vour dollars, that you 
annol conceive of things that are non-commercial, non-negotiable, 
on -subject to any kind of trade. You’re unable to believe that there 
lay exist a person who feels no concern for money. You cannot 
nuiginc what that means. Well, 1 think you’re going to learn. Oh 
es, of course you’ll agree to any demand 1 make, from now on. 1 
>ant you to sit in that office of which you’re so proud, in those 
irecious mills of yours, and play the hero who works eighteen hours 
day, the giant of industry who keeps the whole country going, the 
enius who is above the common herd of whining, lying, chiseling 
itimanity. Then 1 want you to come home and face the only person 
vho knows you for what you really are, who knows the actual value 
*f your word, of your honor, of your integrity, of your vaunted self- 
steem. 1 want you to face, in your own home, the one person who 
lespises you and has the right to do so. I want you to look at me 
whenever you build another furnace, or pour another recordbreaking 
nad of steel, or hear applause and admiration, whenever you feel 
>roud of yourself, whenever you feel clean, whenever you feel drunk 
>n the sense of your own greatness. I want you to look at me when- 
ver you hear of some act of depravity, or feel anger at human 
ormption, or feel contempt for someone's knavery, or are the victim 

399 



of a new governmental extortion— to look and to know that you’re 
no better, that you’re superior to no one, that there’s nothing you 
have the right to condemn. I want you to look at me and to learn 
the fate of the man who tried to build a tower to the sky, or the 
man who wanted to reach the sun on wings made ot wax — 01 you, 
the man who wanted to hold himseli as perfect!” 

Somewhere outside of him and apart, as if he were reading it in 
a brain not his own, he observed the thought that there was some 
flaw in the scheme of the punishment she wanted him to bear, some - 
thing wrong by its own terms, aside from its propriety or justice, 
some practical miscalculation that would demolish it all it discovered. 
He did not attempt to discover it. The thought went by as a mo- 
ment’s notation, made in cold curiosity, to be brought back in some 
distant future. There was nothing within him now with which to feel 
interest or to respond. 

His own brain was numb with the effort to hold the last of his 
sense of justice against so overwhelming a tide of revulsion that it 
swamped Lillian out of human form, past all his pleas to himself 
that he had no right to feel it. If she was loathsome, he thought, it 
was he who had brought her to it; this was her way of taking pain — 
no one could prescribe the form of a human being’s attempt to bear 
suffering — no one could blame— above all not he. who had caused 
it. But he saw no evidence of pain in her manner. Then perhaps the 
ugliness was the only means she could summon to hide it. he thought. 
Then he thought of nothing except of withstanding the revulsion for 
the length of the next moment and of the next 

When she stopped speaking, he asked, “Have you finished?*' 

“Yes, l believe so.” 

“Then you had better take the train home now.” 

When he undertook the motions necessary to remove his evening 
clothes, he discovered that his muscles felt as it he weic at the end 
of a long day of physical labor. His starched shirt was limp with 
sweat There was neither thought nor feeling left in him. nothing but 
a sense that -merged the remnants of both, the sense ol congratula- 
tion upon the greatest victory he had evei demanded of himself: that 
Lillian had walked out of the hotel suite alive 

* * 

Entering Reardon’s office. Dr. Floyd Ferris wore the expression 
of a man so certain of the success ot his quest that he could afford 
a benevolent smile. He spoke with a smooth, cheerful assurance; 
Rearden had the impression that it was the assurance of a cardsharp 
who has spent a prodigious effort in memorizing every possible varia- 
tion of the pattern, and is now safe in the knowledge that every card 
in the deck is marked. 

“Well, Mr. Rearden.” he said, by way of greeting, ‘T didn’t know 
that even a hardened hound of public functions and shaker <>f famous 
hands, like myself, could still get a thrill out of meeting an eminent 
man, but that’s what I feel right now, believe it or not,” 

“How do you do,” said Rearden. 

Dr. Ferris sat down and made a few remarks about th$ colors of 
the leaves in the month of October, as he had observed thffcm by the 

400 



roadside on his long drive from Washington, undertaken specifically 
for the purpose of meeting Mr. Rearden in person. Rearden said 
nothing. Dr. Ferris looked out the window and commented on the 
inspiring sight of the Rearden mills which, he said, were one of the 
most valuable productive enterprises in the country. 

‘ That is not what you thought of my product a year and a half 
ago," said Rearden. 

Dr. Ferris gave a brief frown, as if a dot of the pattern had slipped 
and almost cost him the game, then chuckled, as if he had recaptured 
it. “That was a year and a half ago, Mr. Rearden," he said easily. 
“Times change, and people change with the times — the wise ones 
do. Wisdom lies in knowing when to remember and when to forget. 
Consistency is not a habit of mind which it is wise to practice or to 
expect of the human race." 

He then proceeded to discourse upon the toolishness of coasts* 
tency in a world where nothing was absolute except the principle of 
compromise. He talked earnestly, but in a casual manner, as if both 
understood that this was not the main subject of their interview; yet, 
oddly, he spoke not in the tone of a foreword, but in the tone of a 
postscript, as if the main subject had been settled long ago. 

Rearden waited for the first "Don't you think so?" and answered, 
“Please state the urgent matter for which you requested this ap- 
pointment.'' 

Dr. Feiris looked astonished and blank for a moment, then said 
brightly, as if remembering an unimportant subject which could be 
disposed of without effort, “Oh. that? That was in regard to the 
dates of delivery of Rearden Metal to the State Science Institute. 
We should like to have five thousand tons by the first of December, 
and then we ll be quite agreeable to waiting for the balance of the 
order until after the first of the year/' 

Rearden sat looking at him silently for a long time; each passing 
moment had the effect of making the gay intonations of Dr. Ferris’ 
voice, still hanging in the air of the room, seem more foolish. When 
Dr. Ferris had begun to dread that he would not answer at all. 
Rearden answered, “Hasn’t the traflic cop with the leather leggings, 
whom you sent here, given you a report on his conversation with 
me?" 

“Why, yes, Mr. Rearden. but — " 

“What else do you want to hear?" 

“But that was five months ago, Mr. Rearden. A certain event has 
taken place since, which makes me quite sure that you have changed 
your mind and that you will make no trouble for us at all, just as 
we will make no trouble for you," 

“What event?" 

“An event of which you have far greater knowledge than l — but, 
you see, 1 do have knowledge of it, even though you would much 
prefer me to have none." 

“What event?" 

“Since it is your secret, Mr. Rearden, why not let it remain a 
secret? Who doesn’t have secrets nowadays? For instance. Project X 
is a secret. You realize, of course, that we could obtain your Metal 

401 



simply by having it purchased in smaller quantities by various gov- 
ernment offices who would then transfer it to us— and you would 
not be able to prevent it* But this would necessitate our letting a lot 
of lousy bureaucrats" — Dr. Ferris smiled with disarming frankness — 
“oh yes, we are as unpopular with one another as we are with you 
private citizens— it would necessitate our letting a lot of other bu- 
reaucrats in on the secret of Project X, which would be highly unde- 
sirable at this time And so would any newspaper publicity about 
the Project — if we put you on trial for refusal to comply with a 
government order. But if you had to stand trial on another, much 
more serious charge, where Project X and the State Science Institute 
were not involved, and where you could not raise any issue of princi- 
ple or arouse any public sympathy — why, that would not inconve- 
nience us at all, but it would cost you more than you would care to 
contemplate. Therefore, the only practical thing for you to do is to 
help us keep our secret and get us to help you keep yours — and, as 
I’m sure you realize, we are fully able to keep any of the bureaucrats 
safely oft your trail for as long as we wish." 

“What event, what secret and what trail?" 

“Oh, come, Mr. Rearden, don’t be childish! The tour thousand 
tons of Rearden Metal which you delivered to Ken Danaggei, of 
course,” said Dr. Ferris lightly. 

Rearden did not answer. 

“Issues of principle are such a nuisance," said Dr. Ferris, smiling, 
“and such a waste ot lime for all concerned. Now would you care 
to be a martyt for an issue of principle, only m ciiciimMances where 
nobody will know that that’s what you are - nobody but you and 
me— where you won't get a chance to breathe a word about the 
issue or the principle— where you won't be a hero, the creator of a 
spectacular new metal, making a stand against enemies whose actions 
might appear somewhat shabby m the eyes of the public- -where you 
won't be a hero, but a common criminal, a greedy industrialist — 
who's cheated the law for a plain motive of profit, a racketeer of 
the black market who’s bioken the national regulations designed to 
protect the public welfare- a hero without glory and without public, 
who’ll accomplish no more than about half a column ot newsprint 
somewhere on page five— now would you still care to be that kind 
of martyr? Because that’s just what the issue amounts to now' either 
you let us have the Metal or you go to jail for ten years and take 
your friend Danagger along, too." 

As a biologist. Dr Ferris had always been fascinated by the theory 
that animals had the capacity to smell fear, he had tried to develop 
a similar capacity in himself. Watching Rearden, he concluded that 
the man had long since decided to give in — because he Caught no 
tTacc of any fear. 

“Who was your informer?” asked Rearden. 

“One of your friends. Mr. Rearden. The owner of a copper mine 
in Arizona, who reported to us that you had purchased an extra 
amount of copper last month, above the regular tonnagd required 
for the monthly quota of Rearden Metal which the law permits you 
to produce. Copper is one of the ingredients of Rearden Metal, isn't 

402 



it? Thai was all the information we needed. The rest was easy to 
trace. You mustn't blame that mine owner too much. The copper 
producers, as you know, are being squeezed so badly right now that 
the man had to offer something of value in order to obtain a favor, 
an ‘emergency need’ ruling which suspended a few of the directives 
in his case and gave him a little breathing spell. The person to whom 
he traded his information knew where it would have the highest 
value, so he traded it to me. in return for certain favors he needed. 
So all the necessary evidence, as well as the next ten years of your 
life, are now in my possession — and I am offering you a trade. I’m 
sure you won’t object, since trade is your specialty. The form may 
be a little different from what it was in your youth — but you're a 
smart trader, you’ve always known how to take advantage of chang- 
ing conditions, and these are the conditions of our day, so it should 
not be difficult for you to see where your interests lie and to act 
accordingly.” 

Rcarden said calmly, "In my youth, this was called blackmail.” 

Dr. Ferris grinned, " that’s what it is, Mr. Reardon. We’ve entered 
a much mote i caUstic age.”. 

But there was a peculiar difference, thought Rcarden, between the 
manner of a plain blackmailer and that of Dr. Ferris. A blackmailer 
would show signs of gloating over his victim’s sin and of acknowledg- 
ing its evil, he would suggest a thieat to the victim and a sense of 
danger to them both. Dr. Ferris conveyed none of it. His manner 
was that of dealing with the normal and the natural, it suggested a 
sense of safety, if held no tone of condemnation, but a hint of com- 
radeship. a comradeship based— for both of them - on seif-contempt. 
The sudden feeling that made Rcarden lean forward in a postpre of 
eager attentiveness, was the tooling that he was about to discover 
another step along his half glimpsed trail. 

Seeing Rearden’s look of interest. Dr. Ferns smiled and congratu- 
lated himself on having caught the right key. The game was dear to 
him now, the markings of the pattern were tailing in the right order; 
some men, thought Dr. Ferns, would do anything so long as it was 
left unnamed, but this man wanted frankness, this was the tough 
realist he had expected to find. 

"You’re a practical man, Mr. Rcarden,” said Dr, Ferris amiably, 
"1 can’t understand why you should want to stay behind the times. 
Why don’t you adjust yourself and play it right? You're smarter than 
most of them. You're a valuable person, we've wanted you for a 
long time, and when I heard that you were trying to string along 
with Jim Taggart. I knew you could be had. Don’t bother with Jim 
Taggart, he’s nothing, he's just flea-bait. Get into the big game. We 
can use you and you can use us. Want us to step on Orren Boyle 
lur you? He’s given you an awful beating, want us to trim him down 
a little? H can be done. Or want us to keep Ken Danagger in line? 
Look how impractical you've been about that. 1 know why you sold 
him the Metal— it’s because you need him to get coal from. So you 
take a chance on going to jail and paying huge lines, just to keep 
on the good side of Ken Danagger. Do you call that good business? 
Now, make a deal with us and just let Mr. Danagger understand that 

403 



if he doesn’t toe the line* he’ll go to jail, but you won’t, because 
you’ve got friends he hasn't got — and you'll never have to worry 
about your coal supply from then on. Now that’s the modern way of 
doing business. Ask yourself which way is more practical. And what- 
ever anyone’s said about you, nobody’s ever denied that you’re a 
great businessman and a hard-headed realist.” 

“That’s what I am,” said Rearden. 

“That’s what I thought,” said Dr. Ferris. “You rose to riches in 
an age when most men were going bankrupt, you've always managed 
to blast obstacles, to keep your mills going and to make money — 
that’s your reputation — so you wouldn’t want to be impractical now, 
would you? What for? What do you care, so long as you make 
money? Leave the theories to people like Bertram Scudder and the 
ideals to people like Balph Eubank — and be yourself. Come down 
to earth. You’re not the man who’d lei sentiment interfere with 
business.” 

“No,” said Rearden slowly, “1 wouldn't Not any kind of senti- 
ment.” 

Dr. Ferris smiled. “Don't you suppose we knew it?” he said, his 
tone suggesting that he was letting his patent-leather hair down to 
impress a fellow criminal by a display of superior cunning. “We've 
waited a long time to get something on you. You honest men arc 
such a problem and such a headache. But we knew you’d slip sooner 
or later — and this is just what we wanted.” 

“You seem to be pleased about it ” 

“Don't 1 have good reason to be 9 ” 

“But, after all, I did break one of your taws.” 

“Well, what do you think they're for?” 

Dr. Ferris did not notice the sudden look on Reardon’s lace, the 
look of a man. hit by the first vision of that which he had sought to 
see. Dr. Ferris was past the stage of seeing: he was intent upon 
delivering the last blows to an animal caught in a trap. 

“Did you really think that we want those laws to be observed?” 
said Dr. Ferris. “We want them broken. You’d better get it straight 
that it’s not a bunch of boy scouts you’re up against— then you’ll 
know that this is not the age for beautiful gestures. We're after 
power and we mean it. You fellows were pikers, but we know the 
real trick, and you’d better get wise to it. There’s no way to rule 
innocent men. The only power any government has is the power to 
crack down on criminals Well, when there aren't enough criminals, 
one makes them. One declares so many things to be a crime that it 
becomes impossible for men to live without breaking laws. Who 
wants a nation of law-abiding citi/ens? What’s there in that for any- 
one? But just pass the kind ot laws that can neither be observed nor 
enforced nor objectively interpreted — and you create a natipn of law- 
breakers — and then you cash in on guilt. Now that’s the s$ilem, Mr. 
Rearden. that’s the game, and once you understand it,] | you’ll be 
much easier to deal with.” 

Watching Dr. Ferris watch him, Rearden saw the sudtjen twitch 
of anxiety, the look that precedes panic, as if a clean card jtad fallen 
on the table from a deck Dr. Ferris had never seen before. 

m 



What Dr. Ferris was seeing in Rearden '$ face was the look of 
luminous serenity that comes from the sudden answer to an old, dark 
problem, a look of relaxation and eagerness together; there was a 
youthful clanty in Rearden’s eyes and the faintest touch of contempt 
in the line of his mouth. Whatever this meant — and Dr. Ferris could 
not decipher it — he was certain of one thing: the face held no sign 
of guilt. 

“There’s a Haw in your system. Dr. Ferris,*' Reardon said quietly, 
almost tightly, “a practical Haw which you will discover when you 
put me on trial tor selling four thousand tons of Reaidcn Metal to 
Ken Danagger.” 

It took twenty seconds — Kcarden could fed them moving past 
slowly- -at the end of which Dr. Ferris became convinced that he 
had heard Reardon's final decision. 

“Do you think we’re bluffing'*” snapped Dr. Ferris: his voice sud- 
denly had the quality ot the animals he had spent so much time 
studying* it sounded as if he were baring his teeth. 

“I don’t know,” said Rearden. “1 don’t care, one way or the 
other.” 

“Are you going to he as impractical as that?” 

“The evaluation of an action as ‘practical,* Dr. Ferris, depends on 
what it is that one wishes to practice.” 

“Haven’t you always placed your self-interest above all else?” 

“1 hat is what I am doing light now” 

“If you think we ll let you get away with a — ” 

“You will now please get out of here ” 

“Whom do you think you’re fooling?” Dr. Ferris’ voice had risen 
dose to the edge of a scream. “ The day of the barons of industry is 
done! You've got the goods, but we've got the goods on you, and 
you're going to play it our way or you'll — ” 

Rearden had pressed a button; Miss Ives entered the office. 

“Dr. Ferris has become confused and has lost his way. Miss Ives,” 
said Rearden: “Witt you escort him out, please?” He turned to 
Ferris “Miss Ives is a woman, she weighs about a hundred pounds, 
and she has no practical qualifications at all. only a superlative intel- 
lectual efficiency. She would never do for a bouncer in a saloon, 
only in an impractical place, such as a factory.” 

Mis.s Ives looked as d she were performing a duty of no greater 
emotional significance than taking dictation about a list of shipping 
invoices. Standing straight in a disciplined manner of icy formality, 
she held the door open, let Dr. Ferris cross the room, then walked 
out first; Dr, Ferris followed. 

She came back a lew minutes later, laughing in uncontrollable 
exultation. 

“Mr. Rearden,” she asked, laughing at her fear for him, at their 
danger, at everything but the triumph of the moment, “what is it 
you're doing?” 

He sal in a pose he had never permitted himself before, a pose 
he had resented as the most vulgar symbol of the businessman — he 
sat leaning back in his chair, with his feet on his desk — and it seemed 

405 



to her that the posture had an air of peculiar nobility , that it was 
not the pose of a stuffy executive, but of a young crusader. 

think Pm discovering a new continent, Gwen," he answered 
cheerfully. “A continent that should have been discovered along with 
America, but wasn’t." 

* * 

'‘I have to speak of it to vow," said Eddie Willers, looking at the 
worker across the table. “1 don’t know why it helps me, but it does 
just to know that you’re hearing me." 

K was late and the lights of the underground cafeteria were low, 
but Eddie Willers could see the worker’s eyes looking at him 
intently. 

“I feel as if ... as if there’s no people and no human language 
left," said Eddie Willers. “I feel that if 1 were to scream in the 
middle of the streets, there would bo no one to hear it. . , . No. 
that's not quite what I feel, it’s this: I feel that someone « screaming 
in the middle of the streets, but people are passing by and no sound 
can reach them — and it’s not Hank Rcarden or Ken Danngger or I 
who’s screaming, and yet it seems as if it’s all three of us. . . . Don’t 
you see that somebody should have risen to defend them, but nobody 
has or will? Rearden and Danagger were indicted this morning -lor 
an illegal sale of Rcarden Metal. They’ll go on trial next month. I 
was there, in the courtroom m Philadelphia, when they read the 
indictment. Reardon was very calm — 1 kept feeling that he was smil- 
ing. but he wasn’t. Danagger was worse than calm He didn’t say a 
word, he just stood there, as if the room were empty. . . The 
newspapers are saying that both of them should be thrown in jail. . . . 
No . . . no. I’m not shaking, I’m all right, I’ll be all light in a 
moment. . . , That’s why I haven’t said a word to her, l was afraid 
I*d explode and l didn’t want to make it harder for hei, I know how 
she feels. . . . Oh yes, she spoke to me about it, and she didn’t shake, 
but it was worse — you know, the kind of rigidity when a person acts 
as if she didn’t feel anything at all, and . . Listen, did I ever tell 

you that 1 like you 7 1 like you very much —for the way you look 
right now. You hear us. You understand . . What did she say 7 It 

was strange: it’s not Hank Rcarden that she’s afraid for, it’s Ken 
Danagger She said that Rearden will have the strength to take it. 
but Danagger won’t. Not that he’ll lack the strength, but he’ll refuse 
to take it. .She . . . she feels certain that Ken Danagger will he the 
next one to go. To go like Ellis Wyatt and all those others. To give 
up and vanish . . . Why? Well, she thinks that there’s something like 
a shift of stress involved — economic and personal stress As soon as 
all the weight of the moment shifts to the shoulders of some one 
man — he's the one who vanishes, like a pillar slashed off. A year 
ago, nothing worse could have happened to the country th$n to lose 
Ellis Wyatt. He’s the one we lost. Since then, she says, itT been as 
if the center of gravity were swinging wildly — like in a sinking cargo 
ship out of control— shifting from industry to industry, Irofn man to 
man. When we lose one, another becomes that much morte desper- 
ately needed — and he’s the one we lose next. Well, what cbuld be a 
greater disaster now than to have the country’s coal supply left in 

406 



the hands of men like Boyle or Larkin? And there’s no one left in 
the coal industry who amounts to much, except Ken Danagger. So 
she says that she feels almost as if he’s a marked man, as if he’s hit 
by a spotlight right now, waiting to be cut down- - . . What are you 
laughing at? It might sound preposterous, but i think it’s true. . . . 
What? . . . Oh yes. you bet she’s a smart woman! . . . And then 
there's another thing involved, she says. A man has to come to a 
certain mental stage— not anger oi despair, but something much, 
much more than both — before he can be cut down. She can’t tell 
what it is, but she knew, long before the tire, that Ellis Wyatt had 
reached that stage and something would happen to him. When she 
saw Ken Da nagger in the courtroom today, she said that he was 
ready for the destroyer. ... Yes, that’s the words she used: he was 
ready for the destroyer. You see, she doesn’t think it’s happening 
by chance or accident She thinks there’s a system behind it. an inten- 
tion. a man There's a destroyer loose in the country, who’s cutting 
down the buttresses one after another to let the structure collapse 
upon our heads. Some ruthless creature moved by some inconceiv- 
able purpose . . She says that she won’t let him get Ken Danagger. 
She keeps repeating that she must stop Danagger — and she wants 
to speak to him, to beg, to plead, to revive whatever it is that he’s 
losing, to arm him against the destroyer, before the destroyer comes. 
She’s desperately anxious to reach Danagger first. He has refused 
to see anyone. He's gone back to Pittsburgh, to his mines. But she 
got him on the phone, late today, and she's made an appointment 
to see him tomorrow afternoon. . . Yes, she’ll go to Pittsburgh 
tomorrow. Yes, she's afraid for Danagger, terribly afraid. . . . 
No She knows nothing about the destroyer. She has no clue to his 
identity, no evidence of his existence— except the trail of destruction. 
But she teels certain that he exists. . , . No. she cannot guess his 
purpose. She says that nothing on earth could justify him. There are 
times when she feels that she'd like to find him more than any other 
man in the world, more than the inventor of the motor. She says 
that if she found the destroyer, she’d shoot him on sight — she’d be 
willing to give her life if she could take his first and by her own 
hand . . . because he’s the most evil creature that's ever existed, the 
man who’s draining the brains of the world. ... 1 guess it's getting 
to be too much for her, at times— -even for her. 1 don't think she 
allows herself to know how tired she is. The other morning, 1 came 
to work very early and 1 found her asleep on the couch in her office, 
with the light still burning on her desk. She’d been there all night 
1 just stood and looked at her, l wouldn’t have awakened her if the 
whole goddamn railroad collapsed. . . . When she was asleep? Why, 
she looked like a young girl. She looked as if she felt certain that 
she would awaken in a world where no one would harm her, as if 
she had nothing to hide or to fear. That's what was terrible — that 
guiltless purity of her face, with her body twisted by exhaustion, still 
lying there as she had collapsed. She looked — say, why should you 
ask me what she looks like when she’s asleep? ... Yes, you're right, 
why do / talk about it? 1 shouldn’t. 1 don’t know what made me 
think of it. . . . Don’t pay any attention to me. I'll be all right 

407 



tomorrow. I guess it’s just that I’m sort of shell-shocked by that 
courtroom. I keep thinking: if men like Reardon and Danagger are 
to be sent to jail, then what kind of world are we working in and 
what for? Isn't there any justice left on earth? 1 was foolish enough 
to say that to a reporter when we were leaving the courtroom —and 
he just laughed and said, ‘Who is John Galt?’ . . . Tell me, what’s 
happening to us? Isn’t there a single man of justice left? Isn’t there 
anyone to defend them? Oh, do you hear me? Isn’t there anyone to 
defend them?” 

* * 

“Mr. Danaggei will be fiee in a moment. Miss Taggart. He has a 
visitor in his office. Will you excuse it. please?’* said the secretary. 

Through the two hours of her llight to Pittsburgh. Dagny had been 
tensely unable to justify her anxietv or to dismiss it; there was no 
reason to count minutes, yet she had felt a blind desire to hurry. 
The anxiety vanished when she entered the anteroom of Ken Danag- 
ger’s office: she had reached him. nothing had happened to prevent 
it, she felt safety, confidence and an enormous sense of relief 

The words of the secretary demolished it. You’re becoming a cow- 
ard — thought Dagnv, feeling a causeless jolt ot dread at the words, 
out of alt proportion to their meaning. 

“1 am so sorry. Miss Taggart.’’ She heard the secretary’s respectful, 
solicitous voice and realized that she had stood there without answer- 
ing. “Mr. Danagger will be with you in just a moment. Won’t you 
sit down?” The voice conveyed an anxious concern over the impro- 
priety of keeping her waiting. 

Dagnv smiled. “Oh, that's quite all right ” 

She sat down in a wooden armchair, facing the secretary’s failing. 
She reached for a cigarette and stopped, wondering whether she 
would have time to finish it, hoping that she would not. then lighted 
it brusquely 

It was an old-fashioned frame building, this headquarters of the 
great Danagger Coal Company. Somewhere in the hills beyond the 
window were the pits where Ken Danagger had once worked as a 
miner. He had never moved his office awav from the coal fields. 

She could see the mine entrances cut into the hillsides, small 
frames of metal girders, that led to an immense underground king- 
dom. They seemed precariously modest, lost in the violent orange 
and red of the hills. . . . Under a harsh blue sky, in the sunlight of 
late October, the sea of leaves looked like a sea of fire . like 
waves rolling to swallow the fragile posts ol the mine doorways. She 
shuddered and looked away: she thought of the flaming leaves spread 
over the hills of Wisconsin, on the road to Starnesville. 

She noticed that there was only a stub left of the cigarette between 
her fingers. She lighted another. 

When she glanced at the clock on the wall of the antdruom, she 
caught the secretary glancing at it at the same time. Her appointment 
was for three o’clock; the white dial said: 3:12. ; 

“Please forgive it. Miss Taggart," said the secretary, “tylr, Danag- 
ger will be through, any moment now Mr. Danagger is extremely 

408 



punctual about his appointments. Please believe me that this is 
unprecedented.” 

"I know it.” She knew that Ken Danagger was as rigidly exact 
about his schedule as a railroad timetable and that he had been 
known to cancel an interview if a caller permitted himself to arrive 
live minutes late. 

The secretary was an elderly spinster with a forbidding manner: a 
manner of even-toned courtesy impervious to any shock, just as her 
spotless white blouse was impervious to an atmosphere tilled with 
coal dust. Dagny thought it strange that a hardened, well-trained 
woman of this type should appear to be nervous: she volunteered 
no conversation, she sat still, bent over some pages of paper on her 
desk. Half of Dagny's cigarette had gone in smoke, while the woman 
still sat looking at the same page. 

When she raised her head to glance at the dock, the dial said: 
V.tO. “I know that this is inexcusable, Miss Taggart." The note of 
apprehension was obvious in her voice now. i am unable to under- 
stand it.” 

“Would you mind telling Mi. Danagger that I’m here?” 

“I can't'" It was almost a cry; she saw Dagny’s astonished glance 
and left obliged to explain; "Mr. Danagger called me. on the interof- 
fice communicator, and told me that he was not to be interrupted 
under any circumstances or tor any reason whatever." 

“When did he do that?" 

The moment’s pause was like a small air cushion for the answer: 
“ l wo hours ago.” 

Dagny looked at the closed door of Danagger ‘s office. She could 
hear the sound of a voice beyond the door, but so faintly that she 
could not tell whether it was the voice of one man or the conversa- 
tion of two; she could not distinguish the words or the emotional 
quality of the tone, it was only a low, even progression of sounds 
that seemed normal and did not convey the pitch of raised voices. 

“How long has Mr Danagger been in conference?" she asked. 

“Since one o’clock," said the secretary grimly, then added in apol- 
ogy. ‘it was an unscheduled caller, or Mr. Danagger would never 
have permuted this to happen " 

The door was not locked, thought Dagny, she felt an unreasoning 
desire to tear it open and walk in- - it was only a few wooden boards 
and a brass knob, it would require only a small muscular contraction 
of her arm— but she looked away, knowing that the power of a 
civilized order and of Ken Da nagger’s right was more impregnable 
a banter than any lock. 

She found herself staring at the stubs of hei cigarettes in the ash- 
tray stand beside her, and wondered why it gave her a sharper feeling 
of apprehension, then she realized that she was thinking of Hugh 
Akston: she had written to him. at his diner in Wyoming, asking him 
to tell her wheie he had obtained the cigarette with the dollar sign; 
her letter had come back, with a postal inscription to inform her 
that he had moved away, leaving no forwarding address. 

She told herself angnly that this had no connection with the pres- 
ent moment and that she had to control her nerves. But her hand 

409 



jerked to press the button of the ashtray and make the cigarette 
stubs vanish inside the stand. 

As she looked up, her eyes met the glance of the secretary watch- 
ing her. “I am sorry. Miss Taggart. I don't know what to do about 
it.*' It was an openly desperate plea. “I don’t dare interrupt/' 

Dagny asked slowly, as a demand, in defiance of office etiquette, 
“Who is with Mr. Dan agger?'’ 

“1 don't know. Miss Taggart. I have never Seen the gentleman 
before/' She noticed the sudden, fixed stillness of Dagny’s eyes and 
added. “J think it’s a childhood friend of Mr. Danagger." 

“Oh!" said Dagny, relieved, 

“He came in unannounced and asked to see Mr. Danagger and 
said that this was an appointment which Mr. Danagger had made 
with him forty years ago " 

“How old is Mr. Danagger?" 

“Fifty-two." said the secretary She added reflectively, in the tone 
of a casual remark, “Mr. Danagger started working at the age of 
twelve." After another silence, she added, “The strange thing is that 
the visitor does not look as if he’s even forty years old. He seems 
to be a man in his thirties " 

“Did he give his name?" 

“No." 

“What does he look like?" 

The secretary smiled with sudden animation, as il she were about 
to utter an enthusiastic compliment, but the smile vanished abruptly. 
“I don’t know." she answered uneasily. “He’s hard to describe. He 
has a strange face." 

They had been silent for a long time, and the hands of the dial 
were approaching 3:50 when the buzzer rang on the secretary's 
desk — the bell from Danaggcr’s office, the signal of permission to 
enter. 

They both leaped to their feet, and the secretary rushed forward, 
smiling with, relief, hastening to open the door. 

As she entered Danagger s office, Dagny saw the private exit door 
dosing after the caller who had preceded her She heard the knock 
of the door against the jamb and the faint tinkle of the glass panel. 

She saw the man who had left, by his reflection on Ken Danagger’s 
face. It was not the face she had seen in the courtroom, it was not 
the face she had known for years as a countenance of unchanging, 
unfeeling rigidity— it was a face which a young man of twenty should 
hope for. but could not achieve, a face from which every sign of 
strain had been wiped out, so that the lined cheeks, the creased 
forehead, the graying hair— like elements rearranged by a new 
theme — were made to form a composition of hope, eagerness and 
guiltless serenity: the theme was deliverance. 

He did not rise when she entered — he looked as if toe had not 
quite returned to the reality of the moment and had forgotten the 
proper routine — but he smiled at her with such simple bdnevolence 
that she found herself smiling in answer. She caught herself thinking 
that this was the way every human being should greet andther — and 

410 



she lost her anxiety, feeling suddenly certain that all was well and 
that nothing to be feared could exist, 

“How do you do. Miss Taggart,” he said, “Forgive me, I think 
that 1 have kept you waiting. Please sit down.” He pointed to the 
chair in front of his desk, 

T didn't mind waiting," she said. “I’m grateful that you gave me 
this appointment, i was extremely anxious to speak to you on a 
matter of urgent importance.” 

He leaned forward across the desk, with a look of attentive con- 
centration, as he always did at the mention of an important business 
matter, but she was not speaking to the man she knew, this was a 
stranger, and she stopped, uncertain about the arguments she had 
been prepared to use. 

He looked at her in silence, and then he said. “Miss Taggart, this 
is such a beautiful day— probably the last, this year. There's a thing 
I've always wanted to do, but never had time for it. I^et’s go back 
to New York together and take one ol those excursion boat trips 
around the island of Manhattan. Lei's take a last look, at the greatest 
city in the world.” 

She sat still, trying to hold her eyes fixed in order to stop the 
office from swaying, this was the Ken Danagger who had never had 

personal friend, had never married, had never attended a play or 
,1 movie, had never permitted anyone the impertinence of taking his 
time for any concern but business, 

"Mi Danagger, 1 came heie to speak to you about a matter of 
crucial importance to the future of your business and mine. I came 
to speak to you about your indictment.” 

"Oh, that? Don’t worry about that. It doesn’t matter. I’m going 
to retire." 

She sat still, feeling nothing, wondering numbly whether this was 
how it felt to heai a death sentence one had dreaded, but had never 
quite believed possible 

Her first movement was a sudden jerk of her head toward the exit 
dooi. she asked, her voice low, her mouth distorted by hatred. "Who 
was he?” 

Danagger laughed, ‘if you've guessed that much, you should have 
guessed that it’s a question 1 won't answer ” 

“Oh God, Ken Danagger!" she moaned, his words made her real- 
ize that the barriei of hopelessness, of silence, of unanswered ques- 
tions was already erected between them: the hatred had been only 
a thin wire that had held her for a moment and she broke with its 
breaking. "Oh God!" 

"You’re wrong, kid," he said gently. "I know how you fed, but 
you're wtong.” then added more formally, as if remembering the 
proper manner, as if still trying to balance himself between two kinds 
of reality, "I'm sorry. Miss Taggart, that you had to come here so 
soon after.” 

i came too late," she said. ‘That's what l came here to prevent. 
1 knew it would happen.” 

"Why?” 

i felt certain that he'd get you next, whoever he is.” 

4H 



“You did? That’s funny. I didn’t.” 

“I wanted to warn you, to . . . to arm you against him.” 

He smiled. 'Take my word for it. Miss Taggatt, so that you won’t 
torture yourself with regrets about the timing: that could not have 
been done.” 

She felt that with every passing minute he was moving away into 
some great distance where she would not be able to reach him. but 
there was still some thin bridge left between them and she had to 
hurry. She leaned forward, she said very quietly, the intensity of 
emotion taking form in the exaggerated steadiness of her voice, “Do 
you remember what you thought and felt, what you were, three hours 
ago? Do you remember what your mines meant to you? Do you 
remember Taggart Transcontinental or Reardon Steel? In the name 
of that, will you answer me? Will you help me to understand?" 

“I will answer whatever 1 may." 

“You have decided to retire? To give up your business 0 ” 

“Yes.” 

“Does it mean nothing to you now?" 

“It means more to me now than it ever did be tore.” 

“But you're going to abandon it?" 

“Yes" 

“Why?" 

“That. I won’t answer." 

“You. who loved your work, who respected nothing but work, 
who despised every kind of aimlessness, passivity and renunciation ~ 
have you renounced the kind of life you loved?” 

"No. I have just discovered how much I do love it " 

“But you intend to exist without work or purpose?" 

“What makes you think that?" 

“Are you going into the coal-mining business somewhere else 0 " 

"No, not into the coal-mining business." 

“Then what are you going to do?” 

“I haven’t decided that vet." 

“Where are you going?” 

“1 won’t answer." 

She gave herself a moment’s pause, to gather her strength, to tell 
herself: Don’t feel, don’t show him that you feel anything, don’t let 
it cloud and break the bridge — then she said, in the same quiet, even 
voice. “Do you realize what your retirement will do to Hank Rear- 
den, to me, to ail the rest of us, whoever is left?" 

“Yes. I realize it more fully than you do at present." 

“And it means nothing to you?" 

“It means more than you will care to believe ” 

“Then why are you deserting us?” 

“You will not believe it and 1 will not explain, but 1 am not de- 
serting you." 

“We’re being left to carry a greater burden, and you're indifferent 
to the knowledge that you’ll see us destroyed by the looters.” 

“Don’t be too sure of that.” 

“Of which? Your indifference or our destruction?” 

“Of either.” 


412 



‘‘But you know, you knew it this morning, that it’s a battle to the 
death, and it’s we — you were one— against the looters.*’ 

“If 1 answer that l know it, but you don’t — you’ll think that I 
attach no meaning to my words. So take it as you wish, but that is 
my answer.” 

‘"Will you tell me the meaning?” 

“No. It’s for you to discover.” 

“You’re willing to give up the world to the looters. We aren’t” 

“Don’t be too sure of either.” 

She remained helplessly silent. The strangeness of his manner was 
its simplicity: he spoke as if he were being completely natural and — 
in the midst of unanswered questions and of a tragic mystery — he 
conveyed the impression that there were no secrets any longer, and 
no mystery need ever have existed. 

But as she watched him, she saw the first break in his joyous calm: 
she saw him struggling against some thought; he hesitated, then said, 
with effort, “About Hank Reardon . . Will you do me a favor?” 

“Of course.” 

“Will you tell him that I . . . You see. I’ve never cared for people, 
yet he was always the man 1 respected, but I didn’t know until today 
that what 1 fell was . . . that he was the only man I ever loved. . . . 
Just tell him this and that I wish I could— no. 1 guess that’s all I can 
tell him. . . He’ll probably damn me for leaving . . . still, maybe 
he won t.” 

“I’ll tell him.” 

Hearing the dulled, hidden sound of pain in his voice, she felt so 
close to him that it seemed impossible he would deliver the blow he 
was delivering— and she made one last effort. 

“Mr Danaggcr, it I were to plead on my knees, if I were to hnd 
some sort of words that I haven't found- would there be . . , is there 
a chance to stop you?” 

“There isn’t.” 

After a moment, she asked tonelcssly, “When are you quitting?” 

“Tonight.” 

“What will you do with” —she pointed at the hills beyond the 
window— “the Danagger Coal Company? To whom are you leav* 
mg it?” 

“I don’t know — or care. To nobody or everybody. To whoever 
wants to take it.” 

“You're not going to dispose of it or appoint a successor?” 

“No. What foi?” 

“To leave it in good hands. Couldn’t you at least name an heir of 
your own choice?” 

“I haven’t any choice It doesn’t make any difference to me. Want 
me to leave it all to you?" He reached for a sheet ot paper. “I’ll 
write a letter naming you sole heiress right now, if you want me to.” 

She shook her head in an involuntary recoil of horror. “I’m not 
a looter!” 

He chuckled, pushing the paper aside “You see? You gave the 
right answer, whether you knew it or not. Don’t worry about Danag- 
ger Coal. It won’t make any difference, whether I appoint the best 

413 



successor in the world, or the worst, or none. No matter who takes 
it over now, whether men or weeds, it won't make any difference.” 

“But to walk off and abandon . . . just abandon ... an industrial 
enterprise, as if we were in the age of landless nomads or of savages 
wandering in the jungle!" 

“Aren’t we?" He was smiling at her, half in mockery, half in 
compassion. “Why should 1 leave a deed or a will? 1 don’t want to 
help the looters to prelend that private property still exists. 1 am 
complying with the system which they have established. They do not 
need me. they say, they only need my coal. Let them take it." 

“Then you're accepting their system?" 

“Am I?” 

She moaned, looking at the exit door, “What has he done to you?” 

“He told me that 1 had the right to exist,” 

“I didn’t believe it possible that in three hours one could make a 
man turn against fifty -two years of his life!” 

“If that’s what you think he’s done, or it you think that he's told 
me some inconceivable revelation, then 1 can see how bewildering 
it would appear to you Bui that’s not vvhat he’s done. He merely 
named what 1 had lived bv. what every man lives by -and to the 
extent of such time as he doesn’t spend destroying himself.” 

She knew that questions were futile and that theie was nothing 
she could say to him. 

He lv>oked at her bowed head and said gently, “You’re a brave 
person, Miss Taggart. I know what you’re doing right now and what 
it’s costing you. Don't torture yourself. Let me go " 

She rose to her feel. She was about to speak - but suddenly he 
saw her stare down, leap lorward and seize the ashtray that stood 
on the edge of the desk 

The ashtray contained a cigarette butt stamped with the sign o! 
the dollar 

“What’s the matter. Miss Taggart?" 

“Did he . . . did he smoke this?" 

“Who?" • 

“Your caller — did he smoke this cigaielte?" 

“Why, 1 don’t know . . 1 guess so . . . yes. I think I did see him 
smoking a cigarette once . . let me see . . . no, that’s not my brand, 
so it must be his." 

“Were there any other visitors m this office today?” 

“No. [Tut why. Miss Taggart? What’s the matter?" 

“May 1 take this?” 

“What? The cigarette butt?" He stared at her in bewilderment 

“Yes." 

“Why, sure — but what for?” 

She was looking down at the butt in the palm of her h$nd as if n 
were a jewel. “I don’t know ... 1 don’t know vvhat good it will do 
me, except that it’s a clue to”— she smiled bitterly— “to k secret of 
my own." \ 

She stood, reluctant to leave, looking at Ken Da nagger in the 
manner of a last took at one departing for the realm of $o return 

He guessed it, smiled and extended his hand. “1 won’t say good- 

414 



bye/’ he said, “because I’ll see you again in the not too distant 
future.” 

“Oh/’ she said eagerly, holding his hand clasped across the desk, 
“arc you going to return?” 

“No. You're going to join me." 

* * 

There was only a faint red breath above the structures in the 
darkness, as if the mills were asleep but alive, with the even breath- 
ing of the furnaces and the distant heartbeats of the conveyor belts 
to show it. Reardon stood at the window of his office, his hand 
pressed to the pane; in the perspective of distance, his hand covered 
half a mile of structures, as if he were trying to hold them. 

He was looking at a long wall of vertical strips, which was the 
battery of coke ovens. A narrow door slid open with a brief gasp of 
(lame, and a sheet of red-glowing coke came sliding out smoothly, 
like a slice of bread from the side of a giant toaster. It held still for 
an instant, then an angular aack shot through the slice and it crum- 
bled into a gondola waiting on the rails below 

Danagger coal, he thought These were the only words in his mind. 
The rest was a feeling of loneliness, so vast that even its own pain 
seemed swallowed in an enormous void. 

Yesterday, Dagnv had told him the story of her futile attempt and 
given him Da nagger's message Ibis morning, he had heard the news 
that Danagger had disappeared Through his sleepless night, then 
through the taut concentration on the duties of the day, his answer 
to the message had kept beating in his mind, the answer he would 
never have a chance to utter. 

‘1 he only man I ever loved.” It came from Ken Danaggci, who 
had never expressed anything more personal than ’‘Look here. Rear- 
den.” He thought. Why had we let tt go? Why had we both been 
condemned - in the hours away Irom oui desks-— to an exile among 
dreary strangers who had made us give up all desire for rest, for 
friendship, for the sound ol human voices? Could I now reclaim a 
single hour spent listening to my brother Philip and give it to Ken 
Danagger? Who made it our duty to accept, as the only reward for 
our work, the gray torture of pretending love for those who roused 
us to nothing but contempt? We who were able to melt rock and 
metal for our purpose, why had we never sought that which we 
wanted from men'* 

He tried to choke the words in his mind, knowing that it was 
useless to think of them now. But the words were there and they 
were like words addressed to the dead: No, I don't damn you for 
leaving- il that is the question and the pam which you took away 
with you. Why didn't you give me a chance to tell you . . . what? that 
1 approve? . , . no, but that I can neither blame you nor follow you, 

( losing his eyes, he permitted himself to experience for a moment 
the immense relief he would feel if he, too, were to walk off, aban- 
doning everything Under the shock of his loss, he felt a thin thread 
of envy. Why didn’t they come for me, too, whoever they are, and 
give me that irresistible reason which would make me go? But in 
the next moment, his shudder of anger told him that he would mur- 

415 



dcr the man who’d attempt to approach him, he would murder be- 
fore he could hear the words of the secret that would take him away 
from his mills. 

It was late, his staff had gone, but he dreaded the road to his 
house and the emptiness of the evening ahead. He felt as if the 
enemy who had wiped out Ken Danagger were waiting for him in 
the darkness beyond the glow of the mills. He was not invulnerable 
any longer, but whatever it was. he thought, wherever it came from, 
he was safe from it here, as in a circle of tires drawn about him to 
ward off evil. 

He looked at the glittering white splashes on the dark windows of 
a structure in the distance; they were like motionless ripples of sun- 
light on water. It was the reflection of the neon sign that burned on 
the roof of the building above his head, saying: Rearden Steel. He 
thought of the night when he had wished to light a sign above his 
past, saying: Rearden Life. Why had he wished it? For whose eyes 
to see? 

He thought — in bitter astonishment and for the first time — that 
the joyous pride he had once felt, had come from his respect for 
men, for the value of their admiration and their judgment. He did 
not feel it any longer. There were no men, he thought, to whose 
sight he could wish to offer that sign. 

He turned brusquely awav from the window. He seized his over- 
coat with the harsh sweep of a gesture intended to jolt him back 
into the discipline of action. He slammed the two folds of the over- 
coat about his body, he jerked the belt tight, then hastened to turn 
off the lights with rapid snaps of his hand on his way out of the office. 

He threw the door open — and stopped. A single lamp was burn- 
ing in a corner of the dimmed anteroom, lhe man who sat on the 
edge of a desk, in a pose of casual, patient waiting, was Francisco 
d’ Ancon la 

Rearden stood still and caught a brief instant when Francisco, not 
moving, loojced at him with the hint of an amused smile that was 
like a wink between conspirators at a secret they both understood, 
but would not acknowledge. It was only an instant, almost loo brief 
to gTasp, because it seemed to him that Francisco rose at once at his 
entrance, with a movement of courteous deference. The movement 
suggested a strict formality, the denial of any attempt at presump- 
tion — but it stressed the intimacy of the fact that he uttered no word 
of greeting or explanation. 

Rearden asked, his voice hard, “What are you doing here? 0 

“I thought that you would want to see me tonight, Mr Rearden ” 

“Why?” 

“For the same reason that has kept you so tale in your office. You 
were not working.” 

“How long have you been sitting here?” 

“An hour or two.” 

“Why didn’t you knock at my door?” 

“Would you have allowed me to come in?” 

“You Ye late in asking that question.” 

“Shall 1 leave, Mr. Rearden?” 

416 



Rearden pointed to the door of his office. “Come in.” 

Turning the lights on in the office, moving with unhurried control. 
Rearden thought that he must not allow himself to feci anything, but 
felt the color of fife returning to him in the tensely quiet eagerness of 
an emotion which he would not identify. What he told himself con- 
sciously was: Be careful. 

He sat down on the edge of his desk, crossed his arms, looked at 
Francisco, who remained standing respectfully before him, and asked 
with the cold hint of a smile, “Why did you come here?” 

“You don’t want me to answer, Mr. Rearden. You wouldn't admit 
to me or to yourself how desperately lonely you are tonight, ff you 
don’t question me, you won’t tecl obliged to deny it. Just accept 
what you do know, anyway: that I know it.” 

Taut like a string pulled by anger against the impertinence at one 
end and by admiration for the frankness at the other, Rearden an- 
swered, “I'll admit it, if you wish What should it matter to me, that 
you know it?” 

“That 1 know and care. Mi. Rearden. I’m the only man around 
you who does.” 

“Why should you care? And why should I need your help 
tonight?” 

“Because it's not easy to have to damn the man who meant most 
to you.” 

“I wouldn’t damn you if you’d only stay away from me.” 

Francisco’s eves widened a little, then he grinned and said, “I was 
speaking of Mr. Danagger.” 

For an instant, Rearden looked as if he wanted to slap his own 
face, then he laughed softly and said, “All light Sit down.” 

He waited to see what advantage Francisco would take of it now, 
but Francisco obeyed him in silence, with a smile that had an oddly 
boyish quality a look of triumph and gratitude, together. 

“I don’t damn Ken Danagger.” said Rearden. 

“You donV ? ” The two words seemed to fall with a singular em- 
phasis: they were pronounced very quietly, almost cautiously, with 
no remnant of a smile on Francisco’s face. 

“No. 1 don't try to prescribe how much a man should have to 
bear. If he broke, it’s not for me to judge him.” 

“If he broke . . ?” 

“Well, didn’t he?” 

Francisco leaned back; his smile returned, but it was not a happy 
smile. “What will his disappearance do to you?” 

“I will just have to work a little harder.” 

Francisco looked at a steel bridge traced in black strokes against 
red steam beyond the window, and said, pointing. “Every one of 
those girders has a limit to the load it can carry. What’s yours?” 

Rearden laughed. “Is that what you’re afraid of? Is that why you 
came here? Were you afraid I’d break? Did you want to save me, 
as Dagny Taggart wanted to save Ken Danagger? She tried to reach 
him m time, hut couldn’t.” 

“She did? 1 didn’t know it. Miss Taggart and I disagree about 
many things.” 


417 



“Don't worry. I’m not going to vanish. Let them all give up and 
stop working, t won’t. I don’t know my limit and don’t care. All 1 
have to know is that 1 can’t be stopped.” 

“Any man can be stopped, Mr. Rearden.” 

“How?” 

“It’s only a matter of knowing man’s motive power.” 

“What is it?” 

“You ought to know, Mr. Reardcn. You’re one of the last moral 
men left to the world.” 

Rearden chuckled in bitter amusement “I’ve been called just 
about everything but that. And you’re wrong. You have no idea 
how wrong.” 

“Are you sure/” 

“I ought to know. Moral? What on earth made you say it?” 

Francisco pointed to the mills beyond the window. “This.” 

For a long moment, Rearden looked at him without moving, then 
asked only, “What do you mean?” 

“If you want to see an abstract principle, such as moral action, in 
material form — there it is. Look at it, Mr Rearden. Lsery girder of 
it. every pipe, wire and valve was put there by a choice in answer 
to the question: right or wrong? You had to choose right and you 
had to choose the best within your knowledge — the best for your 
purpose, which was to make steel — and then move on and extend 
the knowledge, and do better, and still better, with your purpose as 
your standard of value. You had to act on your own judgment, you 
had to have the capacity to judge, the courage to stand on the verdict 
of your mind, and the purest, the most ruthless consociation to the 
rule of doing right, of doing the best, the utmost best possible to 
you. Nothing could have made you act against your judgment, and 
you would have rejected as wrong — as evil-— any man who attempted 
to tell you that the best way to heat a furnace was to fill it with ice 
Millions of men, an entire nation, were not able to deter you from 
producing Rearden Mela! — because you had the knowledge of its 
superlative value and the power which such knowledge gives. But 
what I wonder about, Mr Rearden, is why you live by one code of 
principles when you deal with nature arid by another when you deal 
with men?” 

Rearden’s eyes were fixed on him so intently that the question 
came slowly, as if the effort to pronounce it were a distraction 1 
“What do you mean?” 

“Why don’t you hold to the purpose of your life as clearly and 
rigidly as you hold to the purpose of your mills?” 

“What do you mean?” 

“You have judged every brick within this place by its vailue to the 
goal of making steel. Have you been as strict about the goal which 
your work and your steel are serving? What do you wish to achieve 
by giving your life to the making of steel? By what standard of value 
do you judge your days? For instance, why did you spent# ten years 
of exacting effort to produce Rearden Metal?” 

Rearden looked away, the slight, slumping movement of his shoul- 

418 



ders like a sigh of release and disappointment. “If you have to ask 
that, then you wouldn't understand.” 

‘if 1 told you that I understand it, but you don't — would you 
throw me ‘out of here?” 

“I should have thrown you out of here anyway — so go ahead, tell 
me what you mean.” 

“Are you proud of the rail of the John Galt Line?” 

“Yes.” 

“Why?” 

“Because it's the best rad ever made.” 

“Why did you make it?” 

“In order to make money.” 

“There were many easier ways to make money. Why did you 
choose the hardest?” 

“You said it in your speech at Taggart's wedding: in order to 
exchange my best effort for the best effort of others.” 

“If that was your purpose, have you achieved it?” 

A beat of time vanished in a heavy drop of silence “No,” said 
Reardon, 

“Have vou made any money?” 

“No.” ' 

“When you strain your energy to its utmost in order to produce 
the best, do you expect to be rewarded for it or punished?” Rearden 
did not answer. “By every standard of decency, oi honor, of justice 
known to you— -are you convinced that you should have been re- 
warded for it?” 

“Yes,” said Rearden, his voice low 

“Then if you were punished, instead-— what sort ol code have 
vou accepted?” 

Rearden did not answer, 

“It is generally assumed,” said Francisco, “that living in a human 
society makes one’s life much easier and sater than il one were left 
alone to struggle against nature on a desert island. Now wherever 
there is a man who needs or uses metal in any way — Rearden Metal 
lias made his life easier for him. Has it made yours easier for you?” 

“No,” said Reaiden, his voice low. 

“Has it letl your life as it was before you produced the Metal?” 

“No—” said Rearden, the word breaking off as if he had cut short 
the thought that followed. 

Francisco's voice lashed at him suddenly, as a command: “Say it!” 

“It has made it harder,” said Rearden tunelessly. 

“When you felt ptoud of the rail of the John Galt Lane,” said 
Francisco, the measured rhythm ot his voice giving a ruthless clarity 
to his wools, “what sou ot men did you think of? Did you want to 
see that Line used by your equals - by giants of productive energy, 
such as lHllis Wyatt, whom it would help to reach higher and still 
higher achievements of their own?” 

“Yes.” said Rearden eagerly. 

“Did you want to see it used by men who could not equal the 
power of your mind, but who would equal your moral integrity- 
men such as Eddie Willers — who could ftever invent your Metal, but 

419 



who would do their best, work as hard as you did, live by their own 
effort, and — riding on your rail — give a moment’s silent thanks to 
the man who gave them more than they could give him?” 

“Yes,” said Rearden gently. 

"‘Did you want to see it used by whining rotters who never rouse 
themselves to any effort, who do not possess the ability of a filing 
clerk, but demand the income of a company president, who drift 
from failure to failure and expect you to pay their hills, who hold 
their wishing as an equivalent of your work and their need as a 
higher claim to reward than your effort, who demand that you serve 
them, who demand that it be the aim of your life to serve them, 
who demand that your strength be the voiceless, rightless, unpaid, 
unrewarded slave of their impotence, who proclaim that you are 
bom to serfdom by reason of your genius, while they are born to 
rule by the grace of incompetence, that yours is only to give, but 
theirs only to take, that yours is to produce, but theirs to consume, 
that you are not to be paid, neither in matter nor in spirit, neither 
by wealth nor by recognition nor by respect nor by gratitude — so 
that they would ride on your rail and sneer at you and curse you, 
since they owe you nothing, not even the effort of taking off their 
hats which you paid for? Would this be what you wanted? Would 
you feel proud of it?” 

“I'd blast that rail first,” said Rearden, his lips white 

“Then why don't you do it, Mr. Rearden? Of the three kinds of 
men 1 described — which men are being destroyed and which are 
using your Line today 1 

They heard the distant metal heartbeats of the mills through the 
long thread of silence. 

“What l described last,” said Francisco, “is any man who pro- 
claims his right to a single penny of another man s effort.” 

Rearden did not answer; he was looking at the reflection of a neon 
sign on dark windows in the distance. 

“You take pride in setting no limit to your endurance. Mr. Rear- 
den, because you think that you arc doing right. What if you aren’t? 
What if you’re placing your virtue in the service of evil and letting 
it become a tool for the destruction of everything you love, respect 
and admire? Why don't you uphold your own code of values among 
men as you do among iron smelters? You who won't allow one per 
cent of impurity into an alloy of metal— -what have you allowed into 
your moral code?” 

Rearden sat very still: the words in his mind were like the beat of 
steps down the trail he had been seeking; the words were the sanc- 
tion of the victim. 

“You. who would not submit to the hardships of nature, but set 
out to conquer it and placed it in the service of your jiW and your 
comfort — to what have you submitted at the hands of men? You, 
who know from your work that one bears punishment only for being 
wrong — what have you been willing to bear and for w^at reason? 
All your life, you have heard yourself denounced, not forjiyour faults, 
but for your greatest virtues. You have been hated, nbt for your 
mistakes, but for your achievements. You have been scorned for all 

420 



those qualities of character which are your highest pride. You have 
been called selfish for the courage of acting on your own judgment 
and bearing sole responsibility for your own life. You have been 
called arrogant for your independent mind. You have been called 
cruel for your unyielding integrity. You have been called antisocial 
for the vision that made you venture upon undiscovered roads. You 
have been called ruthless for the strength and self-discipline of your 
drive to your purpose. You have been called greedy for the magnifi- 
cence of your power to create wealth. You, who've expended an 
inconceivable flow of energy, have been called a parasite. You, 
who've created abundance where there had been nothing but waste- 
lands and helpless, starving men before you, have been called a rob- 
ber. You, who’ve kept them all alive, have been called an exploiter. 
You, the purest and most moral man among them, have been 
sneered at as a “vulgar materialist.’ Have you stopped to ask them: 
by what right? — by what code?— by what standard? No. you have 
borne it all and kept silent. You bowed to their code and you never 
upheld your own. You knew what exacting morality was needed to 
produce a single metal nail, but you let them biand you as immoral. 
You knew that man needs the strictest code of values to deal with 
nature, but you thought that you needed no such code to deal with 
men. You left the deadliest weapon in the hands of your enemies, 
a weapon you never suspected or understood. Their moral code is 
their weapon. Ask yourself how deeply and in how many terrible 
ways you have accepted it. Ask yourself what it i> that a code of 
moial values does to a man’s life, and why he can't exist without it, 
and what happens to him if he accepts the wrong standard, by which 
the evil is the good. Shall l tell you why you're drawn to me. even 
though you think you ought to damn me? It's because I'm the first 
man who has given you what the whole world owes you and what 
you should have demanded of all men before you dealt with them: 
a moral sanction.” 

Rearden whirled to him, then remained still, with a stillness like 
a gasp, Francisco leaned forward, a.s if he were reaching the landing 
of a dangerous flight: and his eyes were steady, but their glance 
seemed to tremble with intensity. 

‘You’re guilty of a great sin, Mr. Rearden, much guiltier than they 
tell you, but not in the way they preach. The worst guilt is to accept 
an undeserved guilt— and that is what you have been doing all your 
life. You have been paying blackmail, not for your vjees, but for 
your virtues. You have been willing to carry the load of an unearned 
punishment — and to let it grow the heavier the greater the virtues 
you practiced. But your virtues were those which keep men alive. 
Your own moral code -the one you lived bv, but never stated, ac- 
knowledged or defended — was the code that preserves man's exis- 
tence. If you were punished for it, what was the nature of those who 
punished you? Yours was the code of life. What, then, is theirs? 
What standard of value lies at its root? What is its ultimate purpose? 
Do you think that what you're facing is merely a conspiracy to seize 
your wealth? You, who know the source of wealth, should know it’s 
much more and much worse than that. Did you ask me to name 

421 



mao’s motive power? Man’s motive power is his moral code. Avsk 
yourself where their code is leading you and what it offers you as 
your final goal. A viler evil than to murder a man, is to sell him 
suicide as an act of virtue. A viler evil than to throw a man into a 
sacrificial furnace, is to demand that he leap in, of his own will, and 
that he build the furnace, besides. By their own statement, it is they 
who need you and have nothing to offer you in return. By their 
own statement, you must support them because they cannot survive 
without you. Consider the obscenity of offering their impotence and 
their need — their need of you — as a justification for your torture. 
Are you willing to accept it? Do you care to purchase — at the price 
of your great endurance, at the price of your agony— the satisfaction 
of the needs of your own destroyers?" 

"No!” 

"Mr. Reardon," said Francisco, his voice solemnly calm, "if you 
saw Atlas, the giant who holds the world on his shoulders, it you 
saw that he stood, blood running down his ehest. his knees buckling, 
his arms trembling but still trying to hold the world aloft with the 
last of this strength, and the greater his effort the heavier the world 
bore down on his shoulders— what would you tell him to do?" 

"1 . . . don't know. What . . could he do? What would you 
tell him? ’ 

"To shrug." 

The clatter of the metal came m a How ot irregular sounds without 
discernible rhythm, not like the action of a mechanism, but as it 
some conscious impulse were behind every sudden, tearing rise that 
went up and crashed, scattering into the faint moan ot gears. The 
glass of the windows tinkled once in a while. 

Francisco’s eyes were watching Reardon as it he were examining 
the course of -bullets on a battered target. I he course was hard to 
trace: the gaunt figure on the edge ot the desk was erect, the void 
blue eyes showed nothing but the intensity of a glance fixed upon 
a great distance, only the inflexible mouth betrayed a line drawn 
by pain. 

"Go on." said Kcarden with ettort. "continue. You haven’t fin- 
ished. have you 9 " 

"1 have barely begun." Francisco's voice was hard 

"What . . . are you driving at?" 

"You’ll know it beiore Fm through. But first. 1 want you to answer 
a question, if you understand the nature of your burden, how can 
you . . " 

The scream of an alarm siren shattered the space beyond the win- 
dow' and shot like a rocket in a long, thin line to the sky It held for 
an instant, then fell, then went on in rising, tailing spirals of sound, 
as if fighting for breath against terror to scream louder. Jt was the 
shriek of agony, the call tor help, the voice of the mills as of a 
wounded body erving to hold its soul 

Rearden thought that he leaped for the door the instant |he scream 
hit his consciousness, but he saw that he was an instant latjL\ because 
Francisco had preceded him. Flung by the blast of the samjb response 
as bis own. Francisco was flying down the hall, pressing ihe button 

422 



of the elevator and, not waiting, racing on down the stairs. Rcarden 
followed him and, watching the dial of the elevator on the stair 
landings, they met it halfway down the height of the building, Before 
the steel cage had ceased trembling at the sill of the ground floor, 
Francisco was out. racing to meet the sound of the call for help. 
Rcarden had thought himself a good runner, but he could not keep 
up with the swift figure streaking off through stretches of red glare 
and darkness, the figure ol a useless playboy he had hated himself 
tor admiring. 

The stream, gushing from a hole low on the side of a blast furnace, 
did not have the red glow of lire, but the white radiance of sunlight. 
It poured along the ground, branching off at random in sudden 
streaks; it cut through a dank fog of steam with a bright suggestion 
of morning. It was liquid iron, and what the scream of the alarm 
proclaimed was a break-out. 

The charge of the furnace had been hung up arid, breaking, had 
blown the tap-hole open. The furnace foreman lay knocked uncon- 
scious. the white flow spurted, slowly tearing the hole wider, and 
men were struggling with sand, hose and fire clay to stop the glowing 
st leaks that spread in a heavy, gliding motion, eating everything on 
their way into jets of acrid smoke. 

In the few moments which Rcarden needed to grasp the sight and 
nature of the disaster, he saw a man’s figure rising suddenly at the 
toot of the furnace, a figure outlined by the red glare almost as if it 
stood in the path ol the torrent, he saw the swing of a white shirt- 
slee\cd arm that rose and flung a black object into the source of the 
spurting metal. It was Francisco d'Aneonia. and his action belonged 
to an ait which Rcarden had not believed any man to be trained to 
pci form any longer. 

Years before. Real den had worked in an obscure steel plant in 
Minnesota, where it had been his job. alter a blast furnace was 
tapped, to close the hole by hand — by throwing bullets of fire day 
to dam the flow of the metal It was a dangerous job that bad taken 
many lives, it had been abolished years earlier by the invention of 
the hydraulic gun; but there had been struggling, tailing mills which, 
on their way down, had attempted to use the outworn equipment 
and methods of a distant past Rcarden had done the job; but in the 
years since, he had met no other man able to do it. In the midst of 
shooting jets of live steam, in the face of a crumbling blast furnace, 
he was now seeing the tall, slim figure ol the playboy performing 
the task with the skill of an expert. 

It took an instant foi Rcarden to tear ott his coal, sci/c a pair of 
goggles from the first man in sight and join Francisco at the mouth 
ot the furnace. There was no time to speak, to feel or to wonder. 
H.mciseo glanced at him once— and what Rcarden saw was a 
smudged face, black goggles and a wide grin. 

They stood on a slippery bank of baked mud, at the edge of the 
white stream, with the raging hole under their feet, flinging clay into 
the glare where the twisting tongues that looked like gas were boiling 
metal, Reardon’s consciousness became a progression of bending* 
raising the weight, aiming and sending it down and. before it had 

423 



reached its unseen destination, bending for the next one again, a 
consciousness drawn tight upon watching the aim of his arm, to save 
the furnace, and the precarious posture of his feet, to save himself. 
He was aware of nothing else — except that the sum of it was the 
exultant feeling of action, of his own capacity, of his body’s precision, 
of its response to his will: And, with no time to know it, but knowing 
it, seizing it with his senses past the censorship of his mind, he was 
seeing a black silhouette with red rays shooting from behind its 
shoulders, its elbows, its angular curves, the red rays circling through 
steam like the long needles of spotlights, following the movements 
of a swift, expert, confident being whom he had never seen before 
except in evening clothes under the lights of ballrooms. 

There was no time to form words, to think, to explain, but he 
knew that this was the real Francisco d'Anconia, this was what he 
had seen from the first and loved — the word did not shock him, 
because there was no word in his mind, there was only a joyous 
feeling that seemed like a flow of energy added to his own. 

To the rhythm of his body, with the scorching heat on his face 
and the winter night on his shoulder blades, he was seeing suddenly 
that this was the simple essence of his universe: the instantaneous 
refusal to submit to disaster, the irresistible drive to fight it, the 
triumphant feeling of his own ability to win. He was certain that 
Francisco felt it, too. that he had been moved by the same impulse, 
that it was right to feel it. right for both of them to be what they 
were — he caught glimpses of a sweat-streaked face intent upon ac- 
tion. and it was the most joyous face he had ever seen 

The furnace stood above them, a black bulk wrapped in coils of 
tubes and steam, she seemed to pant, shooting red gasps that hung 
on the air above the mills — and they fought not to let her bleed to 
death. Sparks hung about their feet and burst in sudden sheafs out 
of the metal, dying unnoticed against their clothes, against the skin 
of their hands. The stream was coming slower, in broken spurts 
through the dam rising beyond their sight. 

It happened so fast that Rearden knew it fully only after it was 
over. He knew that there were two moments: the first was when he 
saw the violent swing of Francisco's body in a forward thrust that 
sent the bullet to continue the line in space, then he saw the sudden, 
unrhythmic jerk backward that did not succeed, the convulsive beat 
mg against a forward pull, the extended arms of the silhouette losing 
its balance, he thought that a leap across the distance between them 
on the slippery, crumbling ndge would mean the death of both of 
them — and the second moment was when he landed at Francisco s 
side, held him in his arms, hung swaying together between space and 
ridge, over the white pit, then gamed his footing and pulled him 
back, and, for an instant, still held the length of Francisco’s body 
against the length of his own, as he would have held thejbody of an 
only son* His love, his terror, his relief were in a single |enlence: 
careful, you goddamn fool!" 

Francisco reached for a chunk of clay and went on. 

When the job was done and the gap was closed, Rearden noticed 
that there was a twisting pain in the muscles of his arnfe ami legs. 

424 



that his body had no strength left to movc-*yet that he felt as if he 
were entering his office in the morning, eager for ten new problems 
to solve. He looked at Francisco and noticed for the first time that 
their clothes had black-ringed holes, that their hands were bleeding, 
that there was a patch of skin torn on Francisco’s temple and a red 
thread winding down his cheekbone. Francisco pushed the goggles 
back off his eyes and grinned at him: it was a smile of morning. 

A young man with a look of chronic hurt and impertinence to- 
gether, rushed up to him, crying, “I couldn’t help it, Mr. Reardon!” 
and launched into a speech of explanation. Rearden turned his back 
on him without a word. It was the assistant in charge of the pressure 
gauge of the furnace, a young man out of college. 

Somewhere on the outer edge of Reardon's consciousness, there 
was the thought that accidents of this nature were happening more 
frequently now, caused by the kind of ore he was using, but he had 
to use whatever ore he could find. There was the thought that his 
old workers had always been able to avert disaster; any of them 
would have seen the indications of a hang up and known how to 
prevent it; but there were not many of them left, and he had to 
employ whatever men he could find. Through the swirling coils of 
steam around him, he observed that it was the older men who had 
rushed from all over the mills to fight the breakout and now stood 
in line, being given first aid by the medical staff. He wondered what 
was happening to the young men of the country. But the wonder 
was swallowed by the sight of the college boy's face, which he could 
not bear to see, by a wave of contempt, by the wordless thought 
that if this was the enemy, there was nothing to fear. All these things 
came to him and vanished in the outer darkness; the sight blotting 
them out was Francisco d'Anconia. 

He saw Francisco giving orders to the men around him. They did 
not know who he was or where he came from, but they listened: 
they knew he was a man who knew his job. Francisco broke off in 
the middle of a sentence, seeing Rearden approach and listen, and 
said, laughing, "Oh, 1 beg your pardon!” Rearden said, "Go right 
ahead. Ifs all correct, so far.” 

Ihev said nothing to each other when they walked together 
through the darkness, on their way back to the office. Rearden fell 
an exultant laughlei swelling within him, he felt that he wanted, in 
his turn, to wink at Francisco like a fellow' conspirator who had 
learned a secret Francisco would not acknowledge. He glanced at 
his face once in a while, but Francisco would not look at him. 

After a while, Francisco said. ‘You saved my life,’’ The “thank 
you” wits m the way he said it. 

Rearden chuckled. “You saved my furnace.” 

They went on in silence Rearden toll himself growing lighter with 
every step. Raising his face to the cold air, he saw the peaceful darkness 
of the sky and a single star above a smokestack with the vertical let- 
tering; rivakdi-n stji l. He felt how glad he was to be alive. 

He did not expect the change he saw in Francisco’s face when he 
looked at it in the light of his office. The things he had seen by the 
glare of the furnace were gone^ He had expected a look of triumph. 

425 



of mockery at all the iasults Francisco had heard from him, a look 
demanding the apology he was joyously eager to offer. Instead, he 
saw a face made lifeless by an odd dejection. 

“Ate you hurt?” 

“No ... no, not at all.” 

“Come here,” ordered Reardon, opening the door of his bath- 
room. 

“Look at yourself.” 

“Never mind. You come here.” 

For the first time, Reardon felt that he was the older man; he felt 
the pleasure of taking Francisco in charge; he felt a confident, 
amused, paternal protectiveness. He washed the grime oft Francisco’s 
face, he put disinfectants and adhesive bandages on his temple, his 
hands, his scorched elbows. Francisco obeyed him in silence. 

Rearden asked, in the tone of the most eloquent salute he could 
offer, “Where did you learn to work like that?” 

Francisco shrugged. “I was brought up around smelters of ever) 
kind,” he answered indifferently, 

Reardon could not decipher the expression of his face: it was only 
a look of peculiar stillness, as if his eyes were fixed on some secret 
vision of his own that drew his mouth into a line of desolate, bitter, 
hurting self-mockery 

They did not speak until they were back in the office. 

“You know,” said Rearden. “everything you said here was true. 
But that was only part of the story. The other part is what we've 
done tonight. Don't you see? We re able to act. They’re not. So it’s 
we who’ll win m the long run, no matter what they do to us. ’ 

Francisco did not answer. 

“Listen,” said Rearden, “I know what’s been the trouble with you. 
You've never cared to do a teal day’s work in your life I thought 
you were conceited enough, but I see that you have no idea ot what 
you’ve got in you Foiget that fortune of yours tor a while and come 
to work for, me. Ml start you as furnace foreman any lime. You 
don’t know what it will do for you. In a lew' years, you’ll be ready 
to appreciate and to run d’Anconia Copper.” 

He expected a burst of laughter and he was prepared to argue; 
instead, he saw Francisco shaking his head slowly, as if he could not 
trust his voice, as it he feared that were he to speak, he would accept. 
In a moment, he said, “Mr, Rearden ... I think J would give (he 
rest of my life for one year as your furnace foreman. But 1 can’t,” 

“Why not?” 

“Don’t ask me It's . . a personal matter.” 

The vision of Francisco in Reardon’s mind, which he had resented 
and found irresistibly attractive, had been the figure ol a man radi- 
antly incapable of suffering. What he saw now' in Francisco's eyes 
was the look of a quiet, lightly controlled, patiently borne/ torture. 

Francisco reached silently for his overcoat. 

“You’re not leaving, are you?” asked Rearden. 

“Yes.” 

“Aren’t you going to finish what you had to tell me?” 

“Not tonight.” 


426 



‘‘You wanted me to answer a question. What was it?” 

Francisco shook his head. 

“You started asking me how can I . . . How can l what?” 

Francisco's smile was like a moan of pain, the only moan he would 
permit himself. “I won't ask it, Mr. Rearden. 1 know it.” 

Chapter !V THE SANCTION OF THE VICTIM 

The roast turkey had cost $30. The champagne had cost $25. The 
lace tablecloth, a cobweb of grapes and vine leaves iridescent in the 
candlelight, had cost $2,000. The dinner service, with an artist's de~ 
sign burned in blue and gold into a translucent white china, had cost 
$2,500. The silverware, which bore the initials LR in Empire wreaths 
of laurels, had cost $3,000, But it was held to be unspiritual to think 
of money and ot what that money represented. 

A peasant’s wooden shoe, gilded, stood in the center of the table, 
filled with marigolds, grapes and carrots, 1 he candles were stuck into 
pumpkins that were cut as open mouthed faces drooling raisins, nuts 
and candy upon the tablecloth. 

ft was Thanksgiving dinner, and the three who faced Rearden 
about the table were his wife, his mother and his brother. 

"I his is the night to thank the I ord lor our blessings.” said Rear- 
den's mother. "God lias been kind to us There are people all over 
the country who haven't got am food in the house tonight, and some 
that haven't even got a house, and nuue of them going jobless every 
day. (iives me the cieeps to look aiouml in the city. Why. only last 
week, who do you suppose l ran into but Lucie Judson~-Hqnry, do 
you remember Lucie Judson? Used to live next dour to us, up in 
Minnesota, when you were ten twelve years old. Had a boy about 
your age. I lost track of Lucie when they moved to New York, must 
have been all of twenty years ago. Well, it gave me the creeps to 
see what she's come to — just a toothless old hag, wrapped in a man’s 
overcoat, panhandling on a street corner. And I thought: That 
could've been me. but for the giaee of God." 

‘‘Well, if thanks are m order," said Lillian gaily. “I think that we 
shouldn’t forget Gertrude, the new cook. She's an artist." 

“Me, I’m just going to be old-fashioned,” said Philip. Tin just 
going to thank the sweetest mother in the world." 

“Well, for the matter of that." S3id Reardon's mother, “we ought 
to thank Lillian for this dinner and for all the trouble she took to 
make it so pretty. She spent hours fixing the table It’s real quaint 
and different." 

“It's the wooden shoe that does it,” said Philip, bending his head 
sidewise to study it in a manner of eiilical appreciation. “ That’s the 
real touch. Anybody can have candles, silverware and junk, that 
di>esn’t take anything but money— but this shoe, that took thought,” 
* Rearden said nothing. The candlelight moved over his motionless 
face as over a portrait; the portrait bore an expression of imper- 
sonal courtesy. 

“You haven't touched your wine,” said his mother, looking at him, 

427 



“What 1 think is you ought to drink a toast in gratitude to the people 
of this country who have given you so much.” 

“Henry is not in the mood for it. Mother,” said Lillian. “I'm afraid 
Thanksgiving is a holiday only for those who have a clear con- 
science.'’ She raised her wine glass, but stopped it halfway to her 
lips and asked, “You're not going to make some sort of stand at 
your trial tomorrow, are you, Henry?” 

“I am.” 

She put the glass down. “What are you going to do?” 

“You'll see it tomorrow.” 

“You don't really imagine that you can get away with it!” 

“I don't know what you have in mind as the object I’m to get 
away with.'* 

“Do you realize that the charge against vou is extremely serious?” 

“1 do.” 

“You've admitted that you sold the Metal to Ken Danagger.” 

“1 have.” 

“They might send you to jail for ten years.” 

“I don’t think they will, but it’s possible.” 

“Have you been reading the newspapers, Henry?” asked Philip, 
with an odd kind of smile. 

“No,” 

“Oh. you should!” 

“Should I? Why?” 

“You ought to see the names they call you!” 

“That’s interesting,” said Rearden; he said it about the fact that 
Philip’s smile was one of pleasure. 

“I don't understand it,” said his mother. “Jail? Did you say jail. 
Lillian ? Henry, are you going to be sent to jail'*” 

“1 might be.” * 

“But that’s ridiculous! Do something about it.” 

“What?” 

“I don’t know. I don’t understand any of it. Respectable people 
don’t go to jail. Do something. You've always known what to do 
- about business.” 

“Not this kind of business.” 

“I don't believe it.” Her voice had the tone of a frightened, spoiled 
child. “You’re saying it just to be mean.” 

“He’s playing the hero, Mother.” said Lillian. She smiled coldly, 
turning to Rearden. “Don't you think that your attitude is per- 
fectly futile?” 

“No.” 

“You know that cases of this kind are not . . . intended ever to 
come to trial. There are ways to avoid it, to get things settled amica- 
bly — if one knows the right people.” 

“I don’t know the right people.” 

“Look at Orren Boyle. He's done much more and mud| worse 
than your little fling at the black market, but he's smart cnouch to 
keep himself out of courtrooms.” 

“Then I’m not smart enough,” 

428 



“Don’t you think it’s time you made an effort to adjust yourself 
to the conditions of our age?” 

“No,” 

“Well, then 1 don’t see how you can pretend, that you’re some 
sort of victim. If you go to jail, it will he your own fault.” 

"What pretense are you talking about, Lillian?” 

“Oh, I know that you think you’re fighting for some sort of princi- 
ple — but actually it’s only a matter of your incredible conceit. You’re 
doing it for no better reason than because you think you’re right.” 

“Do you think they’re right?” 

She shrugged. “That's the conceit I’m talking about — the idea that 
it matters who’s right or wrong. It’s the most insufferable form of 
vanity, this insistence on always doing right. Mow do you know 
what’s right? How can anyone ever know it? ft's nothing but a delu- 
sion to flatter your own ego and to hurt other people by flaunting 
your superiority ovei them.” 

He was looking at her with attentive interest. “Why should it hurt 
other people, if it’s nothing but a delusion?” 

“Is it necessary for me to point out that in your case it's nothing 
but hypocrisy? That is why 1 find your attitude preposterous. Ques- 
tions ol right have no bearing on human existence. And you’re cer- 
tainly nothing but human — aren’t you, Henry? You’re no better than 
any ot the men you’re going to face tomorrow. I think you should 
remember that it’s not for you to make a stand on any sort of princi- 
ple Maybe you’re a victim in this particular mess, maybe they’re 
pulling a rotten trick on you, but what of it? They're doing it because 
they're weak; they couldn’t resist the temptation to grab your Metal 
and to muscle in on your profits, because they had no other way of 
ever getting rich. Why should you blame them? It’s only a question 
of different strains, but it’s the same shoddy human fabric that gives 
way just as quickly. You wouldn’t be tempted by money., because 
it’s so easy for you to make it. But you wouldn't withstand other 
pressures and you’d fall just as ignominiously. Wouldn't you? So you 
have no right to any righteous indignation against them. You have 
no moral superiority to assert or to defend. And if you haven't, then 
what is the point of fighting a battle that you can't win? 1 suppose 
that one might find some satisfaction in being a martyr, if one is 
above reproach. But you - who are you to cast the first stone?” 

.She paused to observe the effect. There was none, except that his 
look of attentive interest seemed intensified; he listened as if he were 
held by some impersonal, scientific curiosity. It was not the response 
she had expected. 

“I believe you understand me,” she said. 

“No,” he answered quietly, “I don’t.” 

“I think you should abandon the illusion of your own perfection, 
which you know full well to be an illusion. 1 think you should learn 
to get along with other people. The day of the hero is past. This is 
the day of humanity, in a much deeper sense than you imagine. 
Human beings are no longer expected to be saints nor to be punished 
for their sins. Nobody is right or wrong, we're all in it together, 
we’re all human— -and the human is the imperfect. You’ll gain noth- 

429 



ing tomorrow by proving that they’re wrong. You ought to give in 
with good grace, simply because it’s the practical thing to do. You 
ought to keep silent, precisely because they’re wrong. They'll appreci- 
ate it. Make concessions for others and they’ll make concessions for 
you. Live and let live. Give and take. Give in and take in. That's the 
policy of our age — and it’s time you accepted it. Don’t tell me you’re 
too good for it. You know that you’re not. You know that 1 know it.” 

The look of his eyes, held raptly still upon some point in space, 
was not in answer to her words; it was in answer to a man’s voice 
saying to him, ”Do you think that what you’re facing is merely a 
conspiracy to seize your wealth? You, who know the source of 
wealth, should know it’s much more and much worse than that.” 

He turned to look at Lillian. He was seeing the full extent of her 
failure — in the immensity of his own indifference. The droning 
stream of her insults was like the sound of a distant riveting machine, 
a long, impotent pressure that reached nothing within him. He had 
heard her studied reminders of his guilt on every evening he had 
spent at home in the past three months. But guilt had been the one 
emotion he had found himself unable to feel. The punishment she 
had wanted to inflict on him was the torture of shame: what she had 
inflicted was the torture of boredom. 

He remembered his brief glimpse — on that morning in the Wayne- 
Falkland Hotel — of a flaw in her scheme ot punishment, which he 
had not examined. Now he staled it to himself for the first time She 
wanted to force upon him the suffering of dishonor— but his own 
sense of honor was her only weapon (if enforcement. She wanted to 
wrest from him an acknowledgment of his moral depravity- -but only 
his own moral rectitude could attach significance to such a verdict. 
She wanted to injure him by her contempt — but he could not be 
injured, unless he respected her judgment. She wanted to punish him 
for the pain he had caused her and she held her pain as a gun aimed 
at him, as if she wished to extort his agony at the point of his pity. 
But her only tool was his own benevolence, his concern for her, his 
compassion, lifer only power was the power of his own virtues. What 
if he chose to withdraw it? 

An issue of guilt, he thought, had to rest on his own acceptance 
of the code of justice that pronounced him guilty. He did not accept 
it; he never had His virtues, all the virtues she needed to achieve 
his punishment, came from another code and lived by another stan- 
dard. He felt no guilt, no shame, no regret, no dishonor. He felt no 
concern for any verdict she chose to pass upon him: he had lost 
respect for her judgment long ago And the sole chain still holding 
him was only a last remnant of pity. 

But what was the code on which she acted 9 What sort of code 
permitted the concept of a punishment that required the victim's own 
virtue as the fuel to make it work? A code — he thought whi£h would 
destroy only those who tried to observe it; a punishment, (rttm which 
only the honest would suffer, while the dishonest would escape unhurt. 
Could one conceive of an infamy lower than to equate virtue with 
pain, to make virtue, not vice, the source and motive power of suffer- 
ing? If he were the kind of rotter she was struggling to make him 

430 



believe he was, then no issue of his honor and his moral worth would 
matter to him. If he wasn’t then what was the nature of her attempt? 

To count upon his virtue and use it as an instrument of torture, 
to practice blackmail with the victim’s generosity as sole means of 
extortion, to accept the gift of a man’s good will and turn it into a 
tool lor the giver’s destruction ... he sat very still, contemplating 
the formula of so monstrous an evil that he was able to name it, but 
not to believe it possible. 

He sat very still, held by the hammering of a single question: Did 
Lillian know the exact nature of her scheme?— -was it a conscious 
policy, devised with full awareness of its meaning? He shuddered; 
he did not hate her enough to believe it. 

He looked at her. She was absorbed, at the moment, in the task 
of cutting a plum pudding that stood as a mount of blue flame on a 
silver platter before her. Us glow' dancing over her face and her 
laughing mouth— she was plunging a silver knife into the flame, with 
a pi act iced, graceful curve of her arm. She had metallic leaves in the 
red, gold and brown colors of autumn scattered over one shoulder of 
her black velvet gown, they glittered in the candlelight. 

He could not get rid of the impression, which he had kept reeeiv- 
mg and rejecting for three months, that her vengeance was not a 
form of despair, as he had supposed — the impression, which he re- 
garded as inconceivable, that she was enjoying it. He could lind no 
trace of pam in her manner. She had an air of confidence new to 
her. She seemed to be at home in her house for the first time. Even 
though everything within the house was of her own choice and taste, 
she had always seemed to act as the bright, efficient, resentful man- 
ager of a high-class hotel, who keeps smiling in bitter amusement at 
her position of inferiority to the owners. Ihe amusement remained, 
but the bitterness was gone. She had not gained weight, but her 
features had lost their delicate sharpness in a blurring, softening look 
of satisfaction: even her voice sounded as if it had grown plump. 

He did not hear what she was saying: she was laughing in the last 
flicker of the blue flames, while he sat weighing the question: Did 
she know? He felt certain that he had discovered a secret much 
greater than the problem of his marriage, that he had grasped the 
formula of a policy practiced more widely throughout the world than 
he dared to contemplate at the moment. But to convict a human 
being of that practice was a verdict of irrevocable damnation, and 
he knew that he would not believe it of anyone, so long as the 
possibility of a doubt remained. 

No- -he thought, looking at Lillian, with the last effort of his gener- 
osity— he would not believe it of her In the name of whatever grace 
and pride she possessed — in the name of such moments when he 
had seen a smile of joy on her face, the smile of a living being — in 
the name of the brief shadow of love he had once felt for her-— he 
would not pronounce upon her a verdict of tola! evil. 

'Die butler slipped a plate of plum pudding in front of him, and 
he heard Lillian’s voice: “Where have you been for the last five 
minuses, Henry — or is it for the last century? You haven’t answered 
me. You haven’t heard a word I said.” 

431 



“I heard it,” he answered quietly. "‘I don’t know what you’re trying 
to accomplish.” 

“What a question!” said his mother. “Isn’t that just like a man? 
She’s trying to save you from going to jail— that's what she’s tiying 
to accomplish.” 

That could be true, he thought; perhaps, by the reasoning of some 
crude, childish cowardice, the motive of their malice was a desire to 
protect him, to break him down into the safety of a compromise. 
It’s possible, he thought — but knew that he did not believe it 

"You’ve always been unpopular,” said Lillian, “and it's more than 
a matter of any one particular issue. It's that unyielding, intractable 
attitude of yours. The men who’re going to try you, know what 
you're thinking. Dial's why they’ll crack down on you. while they’d 
let another man off,” 

"Why, no, 1 don’t think they know what I'm thinking. Thai’s what 
I have to let them know tomorrow ” 

“Unless you show them that you’re willing to give in and cooper- 
ate, you won’t have a chance. You’ve been too hard to deal with ” 

“No. I’ve been too easy ” 

"But if they put you in jail ” said his mother, "what's going to 
happen to your family? Have you thought of that?” 

"No. I haven't,” 

"Have you thought of the disgrace you’ll bring upon us?” 

"Mother, do you understand the issue in this case '” 

“No, I don’t and I don’t want to understand. It's all dirty bustness 
and dirty politics. All business is just dirty politics and all politics is 
just dirty business. I never did want to understand any of it. I don't 
care who’s right or wrong, but what I think a man ought to think of 
first is his family. Don't you know what this will do to us?” 

“No, Mother ! don’t know or care.” 

His mother looked at him. aghast. 

“Well, 1 think you have a very provincial attitude, all of you,” 
said Philip suddenly. "Nobody here seems to be concerned with the 
wider, social ‘aspects of* the case. I don’t agree with you. Lillian. 1 
don’t see why you say that they're pulling some sort of rotten trick 
on Henry and that he’s in the right. I think he’s guilty as hell 
Mother, \ can explain the issue to you very simply. Theie’s nothing 
unusual about it, the courts are full of cases of this kind. Businessmen 
are taking advantage of the national emergency in ordei to make 
money. They break the regulations which protect the common wel- 
fare of all — for the sake of their own personal gain. They’re profi- 
teers of the black market who grow rich by defrauding the poor of 
their rightful share, at a time of desperate shortage. They pursue a 
ruthless, grasping, grabbing, antisocial policy, based on nothing but 
plain, selfish greed. It’s no use pretending about it, we all know it — 
and I think it’s contemptible,” 

He spoke in a careless, offhand manner, as if explaining |he obvi- 
ous to a group of adolescents; his tone conveyed the assurance of a 
man who knows that the moral ground of his stand is #ot open 
to question. 

Rearden sat looking at him, as if studying an object seen tor the 

432 



first time. Somewhere deep in Rearden’s mind, as a steady, gentle 
inexorable beat, was a man’s voice, saying: By what right? — by what 
code?- -by what standard? 

“Philip,” he said, not raising his voice, “say any of that again and 
you will find yourself out in the street, right now, with the suit you’ve 
got on your back, with whatever change you've got in your pocket 
and with nothing else.” 

He heard no answer, no sound, no movement. He noted that the 
stillness of the three before him had no element of astonishment. 
The look of shock on their faces was not the shock of people at the 
sudden explosion of a bomb, but the shock of people who had known 
that they were playing with a lighted fuse. There were no outcries, 
no protests, no questions: they knew that he meant it and they knew 
everything it meant. A dim sickening feeling told him that they had 
known it long before he did. 

“You . . . you wouldn’t throw your own brother out on the street, 
would you?” his mother said at last; it was not a demand, but a plea. 

“I would.” 

“But he’s your brother . . . Doesn’t that mean anything to you?” 

“No.” 

“Maybe he goes a bit too far at times, but it’s just loose talk, it’s 
just that modern jabber, he doesn't know what he’s saying.” 

“Then let him learn.” 

“Don’t be hard on him . . he's younger than you and . . . and 
weaker. He . . . Henry, don’t look at me that way! I’ve never seen 
you look like that. . You shouldn’t Irighten him. You know that 
he needs you.” 

“Does he know it?’’ 

“You can’t be hard on a man who needs you. it will prey on your 
conscience lor the rest of your life.” 

“It won't.” 

“You’ve got to be kind, Hemy.” 

“I’m not.” 

“You've got to have some pity.” 

“1 haven’t.” 

"A good man knows how to forgive.” 

“I don’t,” 

“You wouldn’t want me to think that you're sellish.” 

“1 am.” 

Philip's eyes were darting from one to the other. He looked like 
a man who had felt certain that he stood on solid granite and had 
suddenly discovered that it was thin ice. now cracking open all 
around him, 

“But 1 . he tried, and stopped: his voice sounded like steps 

testing the ice. “But don't I have any freedom of speech?” 

‘in your own house. Not in nune.” 

“Don’t I have any right to my own ideas?” 

“At your own expense. Not at mine.” 

“Hjon't you tolerate any differences of opinion?” 

“Not when I'm paying the bills.” 

“Isn't there anything involved but money?” 

433 



“Yes* The fact that it's my money,' 1 

“Don't you want to consider any hi . . — he was going to say 

“higher, 1 ’ but changed his mind — “any other aspects?” 

“No.” 

“But I’m not your slave.” 

“Am 1 yours' ? ” 

“I don’t know what you—” He stopped; he knew what was meant. 

“No,” said Rearden, ‘you’re not my slave. You’re free to walk 
out of here any time you choose.” 

“I . . . I'm not speaking of that.” 

“I am.” 

“1 don’t understand it . . 

“Don’t you?” 

“You’ve always known my ... my political views. You’ve never 
objected before.*’ 

“That’s true,” said Rearden gravely. “Perhaps 1 owe you an expla- 
nation* if I have misled you. I’ve tried never to remind you that 
you’re living on my charity. 1 thought that it was your place to re- 
member it. I thought that any human being who accepts the help of 
another, knows that good will is the giver’s only motive and that 
good will is the payment he owes in return. But I see that I was 
wrong. You were getting your food unearned and you concluded 
that affection did not have to be earned, either. You concluded that 
I was the safest person in the world lor you to spit on, precisely 
because I held you by the throat. You concluded that 1 wouldn’t 
want to remind you of it and that I would be tied by the fear ol 
hurting your feelings All right, let’s get it straight; you’re an objeet 
of chanty who’s exhausted his credit long ago. Whatever affection 1 
might have felt tor you once, is gone. I haven't the slightest interest 
in you, your late or your future. I haven't any reason whatever for 
wishing to feed you. 11 you leave my house, it won’t make any differ- 
ence to me whether you starve or not. Now that is your position 
here and I will expect you to remember it, if you wish to stay. If 
not, then gel out.” 

But for the movement of drawing his head a little into his shoul- 
ders, Philip showed no reaction. ‘Don’t imagine that 1 enjoy living 
here,” he said; his voice was lifeless and shrill. “If you think I’m 
happy, you're mistaken. I’d give anything to get away,” The words 
pertained to defiance, but the voice had a curiously cautious quality 
“If that is how you feel about it, it would be best lor me to leave.” 
The words were a statement, but the voice put a question mark at 
the end of it and waited; there was no answer, “You needn’t worry 
about my future. 1 don’t have to ask favors of anybody. 1 can take 
care of myself all right.” The words were addressed to Reasrden, but 
the eyes were looking at his mother; she did not speak j she was 
afraid to move. “I’ve always wanted to be on my own. fie always 
wanted to live in New York, near all my friends.” The voice slowed 
down and added in an impersonal, reflective manner, as if the words 
were not addressed to anyone, “Of course. I’d have the problem of 
maintaining a certain social position . . . it’s not my faulty if I’ll be 
embarrassed by a family name associated Vvith a millionaire ... 1 

434 



would need enough money for a year or two ... to establish myself 
in a manner suitable to my — ” 

"You won’t get it from me.” 

‘i wasn’t asking you for it, was 1? Don’t imagine that l couldn’t 
get it somewhere else, if I wanted to l Don’t imagine that I couldn’t 
leave! I’d go in a minute, if I had only myself to think about. But 
Mother needs me, and if 1 deserted her — ” 

"Don’t explain.” 

"And besides, you misunderstood me, Henry. 1 haven’t said any- 
thing to insult you. I wasn't speaking in any personal way, 1 was only 
discussing the general political picture from an abstract sociological 
viewpoint which — ” 

"Don’t explain,” said Reardcn. He was looking at Philip's face. It 
was half- lowered, its eyes looking up at him. The eyes were lifeless, 
as if they had witnessed nothing: they held no spark of excitement, 
no personal sensation, neither of defiance nor of regret, neither of 
shame nor of suffering; they were filmy ovals that held no response 
to reality, no attempt to understand it, to weigh it, to reach some 
verdict of justice- ovals that held nothing but a dull, still mindless 
hatred. "Don’t explain Just keep your mouth shut.” 

f'hc revulsion that made Rearden turn his lace away contained a 
spasm of pity. There was an instant when he wanted to seize his 
biothcr's shoulders, to shake him, to cry: How could vou do this to 
yourself? How did \ou come to a stage where this is all that's left 
of you? Why did you let the wonderful fact ot >our own existence 
go by? . . lie looked away. He knew it was useless 

He noted, in weary contempt, t hut the three at the table remained 
silent, through all the years past, his consideration lor them had 
brought him nothing but their maliciously righteous reproaches. 
Where was their righteousness now? Now was the time to stand on 
their code of justice — if justice had been any part of their code. Why 
didn’t they throw at him all those accusations ot cruelty and selfish- 
ness, which he had come to accept as the eternal chorus to his life? 
What had permitted them to do it tor Years'* He knew that the words 
he hcatd in his mind were the key to the answer The sanction of 
the victim. 

"Don’t let’s quarrel,” said his mother, her voice cheerless and 
vague. "It’s Thanksgiving Day.” 

When he looked at Lillian, he caught a glance that made him 
certain she had watched him for a long time, its quality was panic. 

He got up. "You will please excuse me now.” he said to the table 
at large. 

"Where are you going?” asked Lillian shat ply. 

He stood looking at her foi a dciibeiale moment, as if to confirm 
the meaning she would read in his answer: "To New York.” 

She jumped to her feet. "Tonight?” 

"Now.” 

"You can’t go to New York tonight!” Her voice was not loud, but 
it had the imperious helplessness of a shriek, " This is not the time 
when you can afford it. When you can afford to desert your family* 
l mean. You ought to think about the matter of dean hands. You’re 

435 



not in a position to permit yourself anything which you know to 
be depravity.’* 

By what code? — thought Rcarden — by what standard? 

“Why do you wish to go to New York tonight?” 

“I think, Lillian, for the same reason that makes you wish to 
stop me.” 

‘'Tomorrow is your trial.” 

“That is what 1 mean.” 

He made a movement to turn, and she raised her voice: “1 don’t 
want you to go!” He smiled, it was the first time he had smiled at 
her in the past three months; it was not the kind of smile she could 
Care to see. “I forbid you to leave us tonight!” 

He turned and left the room. 

Sitting at the wheel of his car, with the glassy, frozen road flying 
at his face and down under the wheels at sixty miles an hour, he let 
the thought of his family drop away from him -and the vision of their 
faces went rotting back into the abyss of speed that swallowed the hare 
trees and lonely structures of the roadside. There was little traffic, 
and few lights in the distant dusters of the towns he passed; the 
emptiness of inactivity was the only sign of a holiday. A hazy glow, 
rusted by frost, flashed above the roof of a factory once in a rare 
while, and a cold wind shrieked through the joints of his car, healing 
the canvas top against the metal frame. 

By some dim sense of conti ast, which he did not define, the 
thought of his family was replaced by the thought of his encounter 
with the Wet Nurse, the Washington boy of his mills. 

At the time of his indictment, he had discovered that the boy had 
known about his deal with Danagger, yet had not reported it to any- 
one. “Why didn't you inform your friends about me?” he had asked. 

The boy had answered brusquely, not looking at him. ‘Didn’t 
want to.” 

“It was part of your job to watch precisely for things of that kind, 
wasn’t it?” 

“Yeah.” 

“Besides, your friends would have been delighted to hear it.” 

“I know.” 

“Didn’t you know what a valuable piece of information it was and 
what a stupendous trade you could have pulled with those friends 
of yours in Washington whom you offered to me once — remem- 
ber? — the friends who always ‘occasion expenses'?” The boy had not 
answered. “It could have made your career at the very top level. 
Don’t tell me that you didn't know it.” 

“I knew it,” 

“Then why didn’t you make use of it?” 

“I didn’t want to.” 

“Why not?” 

“Don’t know.” * 

The boy had stood, glumly avoiding Reardcn’s eyes, a* if trying 
to avoid something incomprehensible within himself. Reairden had 
laughed. “Listen, Non-Absolute, you’re playing with fire. Better go 
and murder somebody fast, before you let it get you — that reason 

436 



that stopped you from turning informer — or else it will blast your 
career to hell.” 

The boy had not answered. 

This morning, Rearden had gone to his office as usual, even though 
the rest of the office building was closed. At lunch time, he had 
stopped at the rolling mills and had been astonished to find the 
Wet Nurse standing there, alone in a corner, ignored by everybody, 
watching the work with an air of childish enjoyment. 

“What are you doing here today?” Rearden had asked. “Don't 
you know it’s a holiday?” 

“Oh. 1 let the girls off, but 1 just came in to finish some business.” 

“What business?” 

“Oh. letters and . . Oh. hell, 1 signed three letters and sharpened 
my pencils, I know 1 didn’t have to do it today, but 1 had nothing 
to do at home and . . I get lonesome away from this place.” 

“Don't you have any family?” 

“No . . .not to speak of. What about you. Mr. Rearden? Don’t 
you have any?” 

“I guess— not to speak of” 

“1 like this place ! like to hang around . . . You know Mr. Rear- 
den. what I studied to be was a metallurgist.” 

Walking away, Rearden had turned to glance back and had caught 
the Wet Nurse looking after him as a boy would look at the hero 
of his childhood’s favorite adventure story God help the poor little 
bastard! - he had thought. 

God help them all- -he thought, driving through the dark streets 
ot a small town, borrowing, in contemptuous pity, the words of their 
belief which he had never shared He saw newspapers displayed on 
metal stands, with the black letters of headlines screaming to empty 
eornei s: “Railroad Disaster.” He had heard the news on the radio, 
that afternoon: there had been a wreck on the main line of Taggart 
Transcontinental, near Rockland, Wyoming: a split rail had sent a 
freight train crashing over the edge of a canyon. Wrecks on the 
Taggart main line were becoming more frequent — the track was 
wearing out— the track which, less than eighteen months ago, Dagny 
was planning to rebuild, promising him a journey from coast to coast 
on his own Metal, 

She had spent a year, picking worn rail from abandoned branches 
to patch the rail of the mam line She had spent months fighting the 
men of Jim’s Board ot Directors, who said that the national emer- 
gency was only temporary and a track that had lasted for ten years 
could well last for another winter, until spring, when conditions 
would improve, as Mr. Wesley Mouch had promised. Three weeks 
ago, she had made them authorize the purchase ot sixty thousand 
tons of new rail; it could do no more than make a few patches across 
the continent in the worst divisions, but it was all she had been able 
to obtain from them. She had had to wrench the money out of men 
deaf with panic: the freight revenues were failing at such a rate that 
the mfcn of the Board had begun to tremble, staring at Jim's idea of 
the most prosperous year in Taggart history. She had had to order 

437 



steel rail, there was no hope of obtaining an “emergency need’* 
permission to buy Rearden Metal and no time to beg for it* 

Rearden looked away from the headlines to the glow at the edge 
of the sky, which was the city of New York far ahead; his hands 
tightened on the wheel a little. 

It was half past nine when he reached the city. Dagny’s apartmenl 
was dark, when he let himself in with his key. He picked up the 
telephone and called her office. Her own voice answered: “Taggart 
Transcontinental/’ 

“Don’t you know it's a holiday?” he asked. 

“Hello, Hank. Railroads have no holidays. Where are you call- 
ing from?” 

“Your place.” 

“I’ll be through in another half-hour ” 

“it’s all right. Stay there. I’ll come for you.” 

The anteroom of her office was dark, when he entered, except for 
the lighted glass cubbyhole of Eddie Wiliers, Eddie was closing his 
desk, getting ready to leave. He looked at Rearden. in puz/lcd 
astonishment. 

“Good evening. Eddie. What is it that keeps you people so busy — 
the Rockland wreck?” 

Eddie sighed. “Yes, Mr. Rearden.” 

“Thai’s what I want to see Dagny about— about your rail.” 

“She’s still here.” 

He started toward her door, when Eddie called after him hesi- 
tantly, “Mr. Rearden . . .” 

He stopped. “Yes‘ ? ” 

“1 wanted to say . . . because tomorrow is your trial . . and whatever 
they do to you is supposed to be in the name of all the people 
I just wanted to say that 1 . . that it won t be in mv name . . even 
if there’s nothing l can do about it, except to tell you . . even if I 

know that that doesn’t mean anything.” 

'it means^much more than you suspect Perhaps more than any 
of us suspect. Thanks, Eddie.” 

Dagny glanced up from her desk, when Rearden entered her of- 
fice: he saw her watching him as he approached and he saw the look 
of weariness disappearing from her eyes. He sat down on the edge 
of the desk. She leaned back, brushing a strand of hair off her lace, 
her shoulders relaxing under her thin white blouse. 

“Dagny, there’s something I want to tell you about the rail that 
you ordered I want you to know this tonight.” 

She was watching him attentively; the expression of his face pulled 
hers into the same look of quietly solemn tension: 

“I am supposed to deliver to Taggart Transcontinental, on Febru- 
ary fifteenth, sixty thousand tons of rail, which is to give ^ou three 
hundred miles of track. You will receive — for the san\£ sum of 
money — eighty thousand tons of rail, which will give youjfive hun- 
dred miles of track You know what material is cheaper and lighter 
than steel. Your rail will not be steel, it will be Rearden Mdtal. Don't 
argue, object or agree. I am not asking for your consent;' You are 
not supposed to consent or to know anything about it. / am doing 

438 



this and I alone will be responsible. We will work it so that those 
on your staff who’ll know that you've ordered steel, won't know that 
you've received Rearden Metal, and those who'll know that you've 
received Rearden Metal, won’t know that you had no permit to buy 
it. We will tangle the bookkeeping in such a way that if the thing 
should ever blow up, nobody wilt be able to pin anything on any- 
body, except on me. they might suspect that I bribed someone on 
your staff, or they might suspect that you were m on it, but they 
won't be able to prove it. 1 want you to give me your word that you 
will never admit it, no matter what happens It's my Metal, and if 
there are any chances to take, it’s 1 who'll take them. 1 have been 
planning this from the day I received your order 1 have ordered the 
copper for it, from a source which will not betray me. 1 did not 
intend to tell you about it till later, but 1 changed my mind. I want 
you to know it tonight —because l am going on trial tomorrow for 
the same kind of crime, " 

She had listened without moving. At his last sentence, he saw a 
faint contraction of her cheeks and lips; it was not quite a smile, but 
it gave him her whole answer: pain, admiration, understanding. 

Then he saw her eyes becoming softer, more painfully, dangerously 
alive — he took her wrist, as if the tight grasp of his fingers and the 
severity of his glance were to give her the support she needed — and 
he said sternly, “Don't thank me — this is not a favor— 1 am doing it 
in order to be able to bear my work, or else I'll break like Ken 
Dan agger." 

She whispered, “All right. Hank. I won't thank you," the tone of 
her voice and the look of her eyes making it a lie by the time it 
was uttered. 

He smiled. “Give rne the word I asked." 

She inclined her head. “I give you my word." He released her 
wrist. She added, not raising her head. “The only thing I’ll say is 
that if they sentence you to jail tomorrow. I’ll quit— without waiting 
for any destroyer to prompt me." 

“You won’t. And 1 don't think they'll sentence me to jail. I think 
they’ll let me off very lightly. 1 have a hypothesis about it — I'll ex- 
plain it to you afterwards, when I’ve put it to the test." 

“What hypothesis?" 

“Who is John Galt?" He smiled, and stood up. “That’s all. We 
won't talk any further about my trial, tonight. You don't happen to 
have anything to drink in your office, have you?" 

“No. But 1 think my traffic manager has some sort of a bar on 
one shelf of his filing closet.'’ 

“Do you think you could steal a drink for me, if he doesn't have 
it locked?" 

“I’ll try." 

He stood looking at the portrait of Nat Taggart on the wall of her 
office— the portrait of a young man with a lifted head — until she 
returned, bringing a bottle of brandy and two glasses. He tilled the 
glasses in silence. 

“You know, Dagny, Thanksgiving was a holiday established by 
productive people to celebrate the success of their work." 

439 



The movement of his arm, as he raised his glass, went from the 
portrait — to her — to himself —to the buildings of the city beyond the 
window. 

* * 

For a month in advance, the people who tilled the courtroom had 
been told by the press that they would see the man who was a greedy 
enemy of society; but they had come to see the man who had in- 
vented Rearden Metal, 

He stood up, when the judges called upon him to do so. He wore 
a gray suit, he had pale blue eyes and blond hair; it was not the 
colors that made his figure seem icily implacable, it was the fact that 
the suit had an expensive simplicity seldom flaunted these days, that it 
belonged m the sternly luxurious office of a rich corporation, that 
his bearing came from a civilized era and clashed with the place 
around him. 

The crowd knew from the newspapers that he represented the evil 
of ruthless wealth; and — as they praised the virtue of chastity, then 
ran to see any movie that displayed a half-naked female on its post- 
ers — so they came to see him; evil, at least, did not have the stale 
hopelessness of a bromide which none believed and none dared to 
challenge. They looked at him without admiration — admit ation was 
a feeling they had lost the capacity to experience, long ago; they 
looked with curiosity and with a dim sense of defiance against those 
who had told them that it was their duty to hate him. 

A few years ago. they would have jeered at his air of self-confident 
wealth. Rut today, there was a slate-gray sky in the windows of the 
courtroom, which promised the first snowstorm of a tong, haid win- 
ter: the last of the country's oil was vanishing, and the coal mines 
were not able to keep up with the hysterical set amble for winter 
supplies. The crowd in the courtroom remembered that this was the 
case which had cost them the services of Ken Danagger. There were 
rumors that the output of the Danagger Coal Company had fallen 
perceptibly within one month; the newspapers said that it was merely 
a matter of readjustment while Dan agger’s cousin was reorganizing 
the company he had taken over. Last week, the front pages had 
carried the story of a catastrophe on the site of a housing project 
under construction: defective steel girders had collapsed, killing four 
workmen; the newspapers had not mentioned, but the crowd knew, 
that the girders had come from Oircn Hoyle’s Associated Steel 

They sat in the courtroom in heavy silence and they looked at the 
tall, gray figure, not with hope— they were losing the capacity to 
hope — but with an impassive neutrality spiked by a faint question 
mark: the question mark was placed over all the pious slogans they 
had heard for years. 

The newspapers had snarled that the cause of the country's trou- 
bles, as this case demonstrated, was the selfish greed of rieft industri- 
alists; that it was men like Hank Rearden who were to Iblame lor 
the shrinking diet, the falling temperature and the cracking roofs iri 
the homes of the nation; that if it had not been for men vifrho broke 
regulations and hampered the government’s plans, prosperity would 
have been achieved long ago; and that a man like Hanl* Rearden 

440 



was prompted by nothing but the profit motive. This last was stated 
without explanation or elaboration, as if the words ‘•profit motive” 
were the self-evident brand of ultimate evil. 

The crowd remembered that these same newspapers, less than two 
years ago, had screamed that the production of Reardcn Metal 
should be forbidden, because its producer was endangering people's 
lives for the sake of his greed; they remembered that the man in 
gray had ridden in the cab of the first engine to run over a track of 
his own Metal; and that he was now on trial for the greedy crime 
of withholding from the public a load of the Metal which it had been 
his greedy crime to offer in the public market. 

According to the procedure established by directives, cases of this 
kind were not tried by a jury, but by a panel of three judges ap- 
pointed by the Bureau of Economic Planning and National Re- 
sources; the procedure, the directives had stated, was to be informal 
and democratic. The judge’s bench had been removed from the old 
Philadelphia courtroom tor this occasion, and replaced by a table on 
a wooden platform: it gave the room an atmosphere suggesting the 
kind of meeting where a presiding body puts something over on a 
mentally retarded membership. 

One of the judges, acting as prosecutor, had read the charges 
You may now offer whatever plea you wish to make in your own 
defense,” he announced 

facing the platform, his voice mtlectionless and peculiarly clear. 
Hank Reardcn answered* 

“1 have no defense.” 

‘Do you — ” fbo judge stumbled; he had not expected it to be 
that easy, “Do you throw yourself upon the mercy of this courjl?” 

i do not recogm/e this court’s right to try me.” 

“What?” 

i do not recognize this court’s right to try me ” 

“But. Mr. Reardcn, this is the legally appointed court to try this 
particular category of cimie. ’ 

“1 do not recognize in\ action as a crime.” 

“But you have admitted that you have broken oui regulations 
controlling the sale of your Metal.” 

“I do not recogm/e your light to control the sale of my Metal.” 

is it necessary tot me to point out that youi recognition was 
not required? 4 ’ 

"No. 1 am fully aware of it and 1 am acting accordingly.” 

He noted the stillness of the room. By the i ules of the complicated 
pretense which all those people played for one another’s benefit, 
they should have considered his stand as incomprehensible folly; 
there should have been lustles of astonishment and derision: there 
weie none, they sat still; they understood. 

“Do you mean that you are refusing to obey the law?” asked 
the judge. 

‘'No. I am complying with the law' — to the letter. Your law holds 
that my life, my work and my property may be disposed of without 
my consent. Very well, you may now dispose of me without my 
participation in the matter, f will not play the part of defending 

441 



myself, where no defense is possible, and 1 will not simulate the 
illusion of dealing with a tribunal of justice/ 1 

“But, Mr. Rearden, the law provides specifically that you are to 
be given an opportunity to present your side of the case and to 
defend yourself/* 

“A prisoner brought to trial can defend himself only if there is an 
objective principle of justice recognized by hi*; judges, a principle 
upholding his rights, which they may not violate and which he can 
invoke. The law, by which you are trying me, holds that there are 
no principles, that l have no rights and that you may do with me 
whatever you please. Very well. Do it." 

“Mr. Rearden, the law which you are denouncing is based on the 
highest principle — the principle of the public good/' 

“Who is the public 9 What does it hold as its good? Theie was a 
time when men believed that v the g<x>d’ was a concept to be defined 
by a code of moral values and that no man had the right to seek his 
good through the violation of the rights of another If it is now 
believed that my fellow men may sacrifice me in any manner they 
please for the sake of whatever they deem to be their own good, if 
they believe that they may seize my property simply because they 
need it — well, so does any burglar. There is only this difference, the 
burglar does not ask me to sanction his act/* 

A group of scats at the side of the courtroom was reserved for 
the prominent visitors who had come from New York to witness the 
trial. Dagny sat motionless and her face showed nothing but a solemn 
attention, the attention of listening with the knowledge that the tlow 
of his words would determine the course of her life. Eddie Willers 
sat beside her. James Taggart had not come. Paul Larkin sat hunched 
forward, his face thrust out, pointed like an animal's muzzle, sharp- 
ened by a look of fear, now turning into malicious hatred. Mr. 
Mowen. who sat beside him, was a man of greater innocence and 
smaller understanding; his tear was of a simpler nature; he listened 
in bewildered indignation and he whispered to Larkin, “Good God, 
now he T s done it! Now he’ll convince the whole country that all 
businessmen arc enemies of the public good!" 

“Are we to understand," asked the judge, “that you hold your 
own interests above the interests of the public? 41 

“I hold that such a question can never arise except in a society 
of cannibals." 

“What . . . what do you mean?” 

“I hold that there is no clash of interests among men who do not 
demand the unearned and do not practice human sacrifices." 

“Are wc to understand that if the public deems it necessary to 
curtail your profits, you do not recognize its right to do so?" 

“Why, yes, I do. The public may curtail my profits jmy time it 
wishes — by refusing to buy my product/’ 

“We are speaking of . . . other methods." ; 

“Any other method of curtailing profits is the method $f looters — 
and I recognize it as such." 

“Mr. Rearden, this is hardly the way to defend yourself/' 

“I said that 1 would not defend myself." 

442 



“Bill this is unheard of! Do you realise the gravity of the charge 
against you?” 

“I do not care to consider it.” 

“Do you realize the possible consequences of your stand?” 

“Fully.” 

“It is the opinion of this couit that the facts presented by the 
prosecution seem to warrant no leniency. The penalty which this 
court has the power to impose on you is extremely severe.” 

“Go ahead.” 

“I beg your pardon?” 

“Impose it.” 

The three judges looked at one another. Then their spokesman 
turned back to Rearden. “This is unprecedented,” he said. 

“It is completely irregular/' said the second judge. “The law re- 
quires you to submit a plea in your own defense. Your only alterna- 
tive is to state for the record that you throw yourself upon the mercy 
of the court.” 

“I do not ” 

“But you have to.” 

“Do you mean that what you expect from me is some sort of 
voluntary action 7 ” 

“Yes.” 

“1 volunteer nothing.” 

“But the law demands that the defendant’s side be represented 
on the record.” 

“Do you mean that you need my help to make this procedure 
legal?” 

“Well, no . . . yes . . . that is, to complete the form.” 

“1 will not help you.” 

The third and youngest judge, who had acted as prosecutor, 
snapped impatiently, “ I bis is ridiculous and unfair! Do you want to 
let it look as if a man of your prominence had been railroaded 
without a — ” He cut himself off short. Somebody at the back of the 
courtroom emitted a long whistle. 

”1 want,” said Rearden gravely, “to let the nature of this proce- 
dure appear exactly for what it is If you need my help to disguise 
it —I will not help you.” 

“But we aie giving you a chance to defend yourself — and it is you 
who are rejecting it.” 

d will not help you to pietend that I have a chance, I will not 
help you to preserve an appearance of righteousness where rights 
are not recognized. I will not help you to preserve an appearance of 
rationality by entering a debate in which a gun is the final argument. 
I will not help you to pretend that you are administering justice.” 

“But the law compels you to volunteer a defense!” 

There was laughter at the back of the courtroom. 

"That is the flaw in your theory, gentlemen,” said Rearden gravely, 
and ! will not help you out of it. If you choose to deal with men by 
means of compulsion, do so. Bui you will discover that you need the 
voluntary co-operation of your victims, in many more ways than you 
c «m see at present. And your victims should discover that it is their 

443 



own volition — which you canuot force— -that makes you possible. I 
choose to be consistent and I will obey you in the manner you de- 
mand. Whatever you wish me to do, l will do it at the point of a gun. 
If you sentence me to jail, you will have to send armed men to carry 
me there — 1 will not volunteer to move. If you fine me, you will have 
to seize ray property to collect the fine — 1 will not volunteer to pay 
it. If you believe that you have the right to force me- -use your guns 
openly. I will not help you to disguise the nature of your action.” 

T Fhc eldest judge leaned forward across the table and his voice 
became suavely derisive: "You speak as if you were fighting for some 
soft of principle, Mr. Reardcn, but what you're actually fighting lor 
is only your property, isn’t it?” 

“Yes, of course. I am fighting for my property. Do you know the 
kind of principle that represents?” 

“You pose as a champion of freedom, but it’s only the freedom 
to make money that you’re after.” 

"Yes. of course. All I want is the freedom to make money. Do 
you know what that freedom implies?” 

“Surely, Mr. Rearden, you wouldn't want your attitude to be mis- 
understood. You wouldn't want to give support to the widespread 
impression that you are a man devoid of social conscience, who feels 
no concern for the welfare of his fellows and works for nothing but 
his own profit.” 

"I work for nothing but my own profit. I earn it.” 

There was a gasp, not of indignation, but of astonishment, in the 
crowd behind him and silence from the judges he faced. He went 
on calmly: 

“No, 1 do not want my attitude to be misunderstood. 1 shall be 
glad to state it for the record. I am in full agreement with the facts 
of everything said about me in the newspapers — with the facts, but 
not with the evaluation. 1 work for nothing but my own profit- 
which I make by selling a product they need to men who are willing 
and able to buy it. 1 do not produce it for their benefit at the expense 
of mine, and they do not buy it for my benefit at the expense of 
theirs; l do not sacrifice my interests to them nor do they sacrifice 
theirs to me; we deal as equals by mutual consent to mutual advan- 
tage — and I am proud of every penny that 1 have earned in this 
manner. 1 am rich and I am proud of every penny I own. I made my 
money by my own effort, »n free exchange and through the voluntary 
consent of every man 1 dealt with — the voluntary consent of those 
who employed me when I started, the voluntary consent of those 
who work for me now, the voluntary consent of those Who buy my 
product. I shall answer all the questions you are afraid to ask me 
openly. Do I wish to pay my workers more than their; services are 
worth to me? I do not Do I wish to sell my product for less than 
my customers are witling to pay me? I do not. Do I wish to sell it 
at a loss or give it away? I do not. If this is evil, do Whatever you 
please about me, according to whatever standards you* hold These 
are mine. I am earning my own living* as every honest ‘man must. 1 
refuse to accept as guilt the fact of my own existence and the fact 
that I must work in order to support it. I refuse to adeept as guilt 

444 



the fact that I am able to do it and do it welt. I refuse to accept as 
guilt the fact that 1 am able to do it better than most people — the 
fact that my work is of greater value than the work of my neighbors 
and that more men are willing to pay me. I refuse to apologize for 
my ability — I refuse to apologize for my success — I refuse to apolo- 
gize for my money. If this is evil, make the most of it. If this is what 
the public finds harmful to its interests, let the public destroy me. 
This is my code — and I will accept no other. I could say to you that 
I have done more good for my fellow men than you can ever hope 
to accomplish — but l will not say it, because l do not seek the good 
of others as a sanction for my right to exist, nor do I recognize the 
good of others as a justification for their seizure of my property or 
their destruction of my life. I will not say that the good of others 
was the purpose of my work — my own good was my purpose, and I 
despise the man who surrenders his. I could say to you that you do 
not serve the public good — that nobody’s good can be achieved at 
the price of human sacrifices — that when you violate the rights of 
one man, you have violated the rights of all, and a public of rightless 
creatures is doomed to destruction. I could say to you that you will 
and can achieve nothing but universal devastation— as any looter 
must, when he runs out of victims. 1 could say it, but l won’t. It is 
not your particular policy that I challenge, but your moral premise. 
If it were true that men could achieve their good by means of turning 
some men into sacrificial animals, and 1 were asked to immolate 
myself for l he sake of creatures who wanted to survive at the price 
of my blood, if 1 were asked to serve the interests of society apart 
from, above and against my own -1 would refuse. I would reject it 
as the most contemptible evil, I would tight it with every power I 
possess, I would tight the whole of mankind, if one minute were all 
l could last before 1 were murdered, l would fight in the full confi- 
dence of the justice of my battle and of a living being’s right to exist. 
Let there lie no misunderstanding about me. If it is now the belief 
of my fellow men, who call themselves the public, that their mood 
requires victims, then I say. The public good be damned. I will have 
no part of it!” 

The crowd burst into applause. 

Rearden whirled around, more startled than his judges. He saw 
faces that laughed in violent excitement, and faces that pleaded for 
help; he saw their silent despair breaking out into the open; he saw 
the same anger and indignation as his own. finding release in the 
wild defiance of their cheering; he saw the looks of admiration and 
the looks of hope. There were also the faces of loose-mouthed young 
men and maliciously unkempt females, the kind who led the booing 
m newsreel theaters at any appearance of a businessman on the 
Ncreen; they did not attempt a counter-demonstration; they were 
silent. 

As he hx>ked at the crowd, people saw in his face what the threats 
<>t the judges had not been able to evoke: the first sign of emotion. 

It was a few moments before they heard the furious beating of a 
gavel upon the table and one of the judges yelling; 

u ~or I shall have the courtroom cleared!” 

445 



As he turned back to the table, Rearden 's eyes moved over the 
visitors* section. His glance paused on Dagny: a pause perceptible 
only to her, as if he were saying: It works. She would have appeared 
calm except that her eyes seemed to have become too large for her 
face. Eddie Wtllers was smiling the kind of smile that is a man’s 
substitute for breaking into tears. Mr. Mowen looked stupefied. Paul 
Larkin was staring at the floor. There was no expression on Bertram 
ScuddeFs face — or on Lillian’s. She sat at the end of a row, her legs 
crossed, a mink stole slanting from her right shoulder to her left hip; 
she looked at Rearden, not moving. 

In the complex violence of all the things he felt, he had time to 
recognize a touch of regret and of longing: there was a face he had 
hoped to see, had looked tor from the start of the session, had 
wanted to be present more than any other face around him. But 
Francisco d'Ancoma had not come. 

“Mr. Rearden,” said the eldest judge, smiling affably, reproach- 
fully and spreading his arms, “it is regrettable that you should have 
misunderstood us so completely. That’s the trouble — that business- 
men refuse to approach us in a spirit of trust and friendship. They 
seem to imagine that we are their enemies. Why do you speak ot 
human sacrifices? What made you go to such an extreme? We have 
no intention of seizing your property or destroying your life. We do 
not seek to harm your interests. We are fully aware of your distin- 
guished achievements. Our purpose is only to balance social pres- 
sures and do justice to all. This hearing is really intended, not as a 
trial, but as a friendly discussion aimed at mulual understanding 
and cooperation.” 

“I do not co-operate at the point of a gun.” 

“Why speak of guns? This matter is not serious enough to warrant 
such references. We are fully aware that the guilt in this ease lies 
chiefly with Mr. Kenneth Da nagger, who instigated this infungcmcnt 
of the law, who exerted pressure upon you and who confessed his 
guilt by disappearing in order to escape trial.” 

“No. We did it by equal, mutual, voluntary agreement ” 

“Mr. Rearden,” said the second judge, “you may not share some 
of our ideas, but when all is said and done, we’re all working for 
the same cause. For the good of the people. We realize that you weic 
prompted to disregard legal technicalities by the critical situation ol 
the coal mines and the crucial importance of fuel to the public 
welfare.” 

“No. I was prompted by my own profit and mv own interests 
What effect it had on the coal mines and the public welfare is for 
you to estimate. That was not mv motive.” 

Mr. Mowen stared dazedly about him and whispered Ut Paul Lar 
kin, “Something’s gone screwy here.” 

“Oh, shut up!” snapped Larkin. 

“I am sure, Mr. Rearden,” said the eldest judge, “that you do not 
really believe— nor does the public— that we wish to ire^l you as a 
sacrificial victim. If anyone has been laboring under such 4 misappre- 
hension, we arc anxious to prove that if is not true.” 

The judges retired to consider their verdict. They did not stay out 

446 



long: They returned to an ominously silent courtroom — and an- 
nounced that a fine of $5,000 was imposed on Henry Rearden, but 
that the sentence was suspended. 

Streaks of jeering laughter ran through the applause that swept 
the courtroom. The applause was aimed at Rearden, the laughter*— 
at the judges. 

Rearden stood motionless, not turning to the crowd, barely hearing 
the applause. He stood looking at the judges. There was no triumph 
in his face, no elation, only the still intensity of contemplating a 
vision with a bitter wonder that was almost fear. He was seeing the 
enormity of the smallness ot the enemy who was destroying the 
world. He felt as if, after a journey of years through a landscape of 
devastation, past the ruins of great factories, the wrecks of powerful 
engines, the bodies of invincible men, he had come upon the de- 
spoiler. expecting to find a giant — and had found a rat eager to scurry 
for cover at the first sound of a human step. If this is what has 
beaten us, he thought, the guilt is ours. 

He was jolted back into the courtroom by the people pressing to 
surround him. He smiled in answer to their smiles, to the frantic, 
tragic eagerness of their faces; there was a touch of sadness in his 
smile. 

“God bless you, Mr. Rearden!” said an old woman with a ragged 
shawl over hei head. "Can't you save us, Mr. Rearden? They're 
eating us alive, and it’s no use fooling anybody about how it’s the 
rich that they’re after -do you know what's happening to us?” 

“Listen. Mr. Rearden.” said a man who looked like a factory 
worker, “it's the rich who're selling us down the river. Tell those 
wealthy bastards, who'ic so anxious to give everything away, that 
when they give away their palaces, they’re giving away the skin off 
our backs.” 

“I know it.” said Rearden. 

The guilt is ours, he thought. If we who were the movers, the 
providers, the benefactors of mankind, were willing to let the brand 
ot evil be stamped upon us and silently to bear punishment for our 
viitues -what sort of “good” did we expect to triumph in the world? 

He looked at the people around him. They had cheered him today; 
they had cheered him by the side of the track of the John Galt Line, 
but tomorrow they would clamor for a new directive from Wesley 
Mouch and a free housing project from Orren Boyle, while Boyle’s 
girders collapsed upon their heads. They would do it. because they 
would be told to forget, as a sin, that which had made them cheer 
flank Rearden. 

Why were they ready to renounce their highest moments as a sin? 
Why were they willing to betray the best within them? W'hat made 
than believe that this earth was a realm of evil where despair was 
their natural fate? He could not name the reason, but he knew that 
a had to be named. He fell it as a huge question mark within the 
courtroom, which it was now his duty to answer. 

This jvas the real sentence imposed upon him, he thought — to 
discover what idea, what simple idea available to the simplest man. 
had made mankind accept the doctrines that led it to self-destruction. 

447 



“Hank* HI never think that it’s hopeless, not ever again,'’ said 
Dagny that evening, after the trial. ‘Til never be tempted to quit. 
You’ve proved that the right always works and always wins — ” She 
stopped, then added “—provided one knows what is the right.” 

Lillian said to him at dinner next day, "So you've won, have you?” 
Her voice was noncommittal; she said nothing else; she was watching 
him, as if studying a riddle. 

The Wet Nurse asked him at the mills, "Mr. Rearden, what’s a 
moral premise?” "What you’re going to have a lot of trouble with.” 
The boy frowned, then shrugged and said, laughing, "God, that was 
a wonderful show! What a beating you gave them, Mr. Rearden! I 
sat by the radio and howled.” "How do you know it was a beating?" 
"Well, it was. wasn’t it?” "Are you sure of it?” "Sure I’m sure.” 
"The thing that makes you sure is a moral premise.” 

The newspapers were silent. After the exaggerated attention they 
had given to the case, they acted as if the trial were not worthy of 
notice. They printed brief accounts on unlikely pages, worded in such 
generalities that no reader could discover any hint of a controver- 
sial issue. 

The businessmen he met seemed to wish to evade the subject of 
his trial. Some made no comment at all, hut turned away, their faces 
showing a peculiar resentment under the effort to appear noncom- 
mittal as if they feared that the mere act of looking at him would 
be interpreted as taking a stand. Others ventured to comment: "In 
my opinion, Rearden, it was extremely unwise of you. ... It seems 
to me that this is hardly the lime to make enemies . . . We can’t 
afford to arouse resentment." 

"Whose resentment?” he asked. 

"I don’t think the government will like it.” 

"You saw the consequences of that." 

"Well, i .don't know . . . The public won’t take it, there’s bound 
to be a lot of indignation.” 

"You saw how the public took it." 

"Well, 1 don’t know . . We've been trying hard not to give any 
grounds for all those accusations about selfish greed — and you’ve 
given ammunition to the enemy.” 

"Would you rather agree with the enemy that you have no right 
to your profits and your property?” 

"Oh, no, no, certainly not — but why go to extremes? There’s al- 
ways a middle ground.” 

"A middle ground between you and your murderers?' 

"Now why use such words?” 

"What I said at the trial, was it true or not?” 

"It’s going to be misquoted and misunderstood.” 

"Was it true or not?” 

"The public is too dumb to grapple with such issues.” 

"Was it true or not?” 

"It s no time to boast about being rich — when the populace is 
starving. It’s just goading them on to seize everything.” 

448 



“But telling them that you have no right to your wealth, while 
they have— is what’s going to restrain them?'’ . 

“Well, l don't know . . 

“1 don’t like the things you said at your trial,” said another man. 
in my opinion, I don’t agree with you at all. Personally, I’m proud 
to believe that 1 am working for the public good, not just for my 
own profit. I like to think that 1 have some goal higher than just 
earning my three meals a day and my Hammond limousine,” 

“And 1 don’t like that idea about no directives and no controls,” 
said another. “I grant you they’re running hog-wild and overdoing 
it But — no controls at all? 1 don’t go along with that. I think some 
controls are necessary. The ones which are for the public good.” 

“I am sorry, gentlemen,” said Rearden, “that I will be obliged to 
save your goddamn necks along with mine.” 

A group of businessmen headed by Mr. Mowen did not issue any 
statements about the trial. But a week later they announced, with 
an inordinate amount of publicity, that they were endowing the con- 
struction of a playground for the children of the unemployed. 

Bertram Scudder did not mention the trial in his column. But ten 
days later, he wrote, among items of miscellaneous gossip: “Some 
idea of the public value of Mr. Hank Rearden may be gathered from 
the fact that of all social groups, he seems to be most unpopular 
with his own fellow businessmen His old-fashioned brand of ruth- 
Icssness seems to be too much even for those predatory barons of 
piolit ” 

On an evening in December— when the street beyond his window 
was like a congested throat coughing with the horns of pre-Christmas 
traffic -Rearden sat in his room at the Wayne-Palkland Hotel, fight- 
ing an enemy more dangerous than weariness or tear: revulsion 
against the thought ol having to deal with human beings. 

He sat, unwilling to venture into the streets of the city, unwilling 
to move, as if he were chained to his chair and to this room. He 
had tried for hours to ignore an emotion that felt like the pull of 
homesickness: his awareness that the only man whom he longed to 
sec. was here, in this hotel, just a few floors above him 

He had caught himself, in the past few weeks, wasting lime in the 
lobby whenever he entered the hotel or left it, loitering unnecessarily 
at the mail counter or the newsstand, watching the hurried currents 
of people, hoping to see Francisco d’Anconia among them. He had 
caught himself eating solitary dinners in the restaurant of the Wayne- 
lalkland, with his eyes on the curtains of the entrance doorway. 
Now he caught himself sitting in his room, thinking that the distance 
was only a few floors. 

i He rose to his feel, with a chuckle of amused indignation; he was 
| Acting, he thought, like a woman who waits for a telephone call and 
fights against the temptation to end the torture by making the first 
move. There was no reason, he thought, why he could not go to 
Francisco d’Anconia, if that was what he wanted. Yet when he told 
, himself that he would, he felt some dangerous element of surrender 
m the intensity of his own relief. 

He made a step toward the phone, to call Francisco’s suite, but 

449 



stopped* It was not what he wanted; what he wanted was simply to 
walk in, unannounced, as Francisco had walked into his office; it was 
this that seemed to state some unstated right between them. 

On his way to the elevator, he thought: He won’t be in or, if he 
is, you’ll probably find him entertaining some floozie, which will 
serve you right. But the thought seemed unreal, he could not make 
it apply to the man he had seen at the mouth of the furnace — he 
stood confidently in the elevator, looking up — he walked confidently 
down the hall, feeling his bitterness relax into gaiety — he knocked 
at the door. 

Francisco’s voice snapped, “Come in!” It had a brusque, absent- 
minded sound. 

Rearden opened the door and stopped on the threshold. One ot 
the hotel’s costliest satin-shaded lamps stood in the middle ol the 
floor, throwing a circle of light on wide sheets of drafting paper, 
Francisco d’Anconia. in shirt sleeves, a strand of hair hanging down 
over his face, lay stretched on the floor, on his stomach, propped up 
by his elbows, biting the end of a pencil in concentration upon some 
point of the intricate tracing before him. He did not look up, he 
seemed to have forgotten the knock. Rearden tried to distinguish the 
drawing: it looked like the section of a smeltei. He stood watching in 
startled wonder; had he had the power to bring into reality his own 
image of Francisco d’Anconia. this was the picture he would have 
seen: the figure of a purposeful young worker intent upon a diffi- 
cult task. 

In a moment, Francisco raised his head. In the next instant, he 
flung his body upward to a kneeling posture, looking at Rearden 
with a smile of incredulous pleasure. In the next, he seized the draw- 
ings and threw them aside too hastily, face down. 

“What did I interrupt?” asked Rearden. 

“Nothing much. Come in.” He was grinning happily. Rearden felt 
suddenly certain that Francisco had waited, too, had waited tor this 
as for a victory which he had not quite hoped to achieve, 

“What were you doing?” asked Rearden. 

“Just amusing myself.” 

“Lei me sec it.” 

“No.” He rose and kicked the drawings aside. 

Rearden noted that if he had resented as impertinence Francisco’s 
manner of proprietorship in his office, he himself was now guilty ot 
the same attitude— because he offered no explanation for his visit, 
but crossed the room and sat down in an armchair, cusually, as if he 
were at home. 

“Why didn’t you come to continue what you had started?” he 
asked. 

“You have been continuing it brilliantly without my jhelp.” 

“Do you mean, my trial?” 

“I mean, your trial.” 

“How do you know? You weren’t there.” » 

Francisco smiled, because the tone of the voice confessed an added 
sentence: I was looking for you. “Don’t you suppose if heard every 
word of it on the radio?” 


450 



'‘You did? Well how did you like hearing your own lines come 
over the air, with me as your stooge?” 

‘You weren't, Mr. Rearden. They weren't my lines. Weren't they 
the things you had always lived by?” 

“Yes.” 

“1 only helped you to see that you should have been proud to live 
by them.” 

“I am glad you heard it.” 

“It was great, Mr. Rearden — and about three generations loo 
late,” 

“What do you mean?” 

“If one single businessman had had the courage, then, to say that 
he worked for nothing but his own profit — and to say it proudly — 
he would have saved the world.” 

“I haven't given up the world as lost.” 

“It isn’t. It can never be. But oh God!* -what he would have 
spared us!” 

“Well, 1 guess we have to light, no matter what era we’re 
caught in.” 

“Yes . . . You know, Mr. Rearden, I would suggest that you get 
a transcript of your trial and read what you said Then see whether 
you are practicing it fully and consistently -or not.” 

“You mean that I'm not?” 

“See for yourself.” 

“I know that you had a great deal to tell me, when we were 
interrupted, that night at the mills. Why don’t you finish what you 
had to say?" 

“No. It’s too soon.” 

Francisco acted as if there were nothing unusual about this visit, 
as if he took it as a matter of natural course — as he had always acted 
in Reardon’s presence. But Rearden noted that he was not so calm 
as he wished to appear: he was pacing the room, in a manner that 
seemed a release for an emotion he did not want to confess: he 
had forgotten the lamp and it still stood on the floor as the room's 
sole illumination. 

“You've been taking an awful beating in the way of discoveries, 
haven’t you?” said Francisco. “How did you like the behavior of 
\our fellow businessmen?” 

“I suppose it was to be expected.” 

His voice tense with the anger of compassion, Francisco said, “It’s 
been twelve years and yet I'm still unable to see it indifferently!” The 
sentence sounded involuntarily, as if. trying to suppress the sound of 
emotion, he had uttered suppressed words. 

“Twelve years — since what?” asked Rearden. 

There was an instant’s pause, but Francisco answered calmly, 
“Since I understood what those men were doing.” He added, “I 
know, what you're going through right now . . . and what’s still 
ahead.” 

“ Thanks,” said Rearden. 

“For what?” 

“For what you're trying so hard not to show. But don't worry 

451 



about me. I'm still able to stand it* . . . You know, I didn’t come 
here because I wanted to talk about myself or even about the trial.” 

*T11 agree to any subject you choose — in order to have you here.” 
He said it in the tone of a courteous joke; but the tone could not 
disguise it; he meant it. “What did you want to talk about?” 

“You.” 

Francisco stopped. He looked at Rearden for a moment, then an- 
swered quietly, “AH right.” 

If that which Rearden felt could have gone directly into words, 
past the barrier of his will, he would have cried: Don’t let me down— 
I need you — I am fighting all of them, 1 have fought to my limit and 
am condemned to light beyond it— -and, as sole ammunition possible 
to me, I need the knowledge of one single man whom I can trust, 
respect and admire. 

Instead, he said calmly, very simply— and the only note of a per* 
sonal bond between them was that tone of sincerity which comes 
with a direct, unqualifiedly rational statement and implies the same 
honesty of mind in the listener — “You know, 1 think that the only 
real moral crime that one man can commit against another is the 
attempt to create, by his words or actions, an impression of the 
contradictory, the impossible, the irrational, and thus shake the con- 
cept of rationality in his victim.” 

“That’s true.” 

“If I say that that is the dilemma you've put me in, would you 
help me by answering a personal question?” 

“I will try.” 

“I don’t have to tell you™ l think you know it— that you are the 
man of the highest mind 1 have ever met. I am coming to accept, 
not as right, but at least as possible, the fact that you refuse to 
exercise your great ability in the world of today. But what a man 
does out of despair, rs not necessarily a key to his character. 1 have 
always thought that the real key is in that which he seeks for his 
enjoyment. And this is what 1 find inconceivable: no matter what 
you’ve given up, so long as you chose to remain alive, how can you 
find any pleasure in spending a life as valuable as yours on running 
after cheap women and on an imbecile’s idea of diversions?” 

Francisco looked at him with a fine smile of amusement, as it 
saying: No? You didn’t want to talk about yourself? And what is it 
that you’re confessing but the desperate loneliness which makes the 
question of my character more important to you than any other 
question right now? 

The smile merged into a soft, good-natured chuckle, as if the ques- 
tion involved no problem for him, no painful secret to reveal 
"There’s a way to solve every dilemma of that kind, Mr. Rearden. 
Check your premises.” He sat down on the floor, settjing himself 
gaily, informally, for a conversation he would enjoy. “Is Jt your own 
first-hand conclusion that I am a man of high mind?” 

“Yes.” 

“Do you know of your own first-hand knowledge thatjl spend my 
life running after women ?” J 

"You’ve never denied it.” 


452 



“Denied it? I’ve gone to a lot of trouble to create that impression*” 

“Do you mean to say that it isn’t true?” 

“Do I strike you as a man with a miserable inferiority complex?” 

“Good God, no!” 

“Only that kind of man spends his life running after women.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“Do you remember what 1 said about money and about the men 
vho seek to reverse the law of cause and effect? ITie men who try 
o replace the mind by seizing the products of the mind? Well, the 
nan who despises himself tries to gain self-esteem from sexual ad* 
/entures— -which can’t be done, because sex is not the cause, but an 
effect and an expression of a man's sense of his own value.” 

“You’d belter explain that.” 

“Did it ever occur to you that it’s the same issue? The men who 
hink that wealth comes from material resources and has no intellec- 
ual root or meaning, are the men who think — for the same reason — 
hat sex is a physical capacity which functions independently of one’s 
nind, choice or code of values. They think that your body creates a 
iesire and makes a choice for you just about in some such way as 
t iron ore transformed itself into railroad rails of its own volition. 
Love is blind, they say; sex is impervious to reason and mocks the 
>ower of all philosophers. But, in fact, a man's sexual choice is the 
vsult and the sum of his fundamental convictions. Tell me what a 
nan finds sexually attractive and l will tell you his entire philosophy 
)t life. Show me the woman he sleeps with and I will tell you his 
valuation of himself. No matter what corruption he's taught about 
the virtue of selflessness, sex is the most profoundly selfish of all 
■ictx, an act which he cannot perforin for any motive but his own 
,* n joy men t— -just try to think of performing it in a spirit of selfless 
charity! — an act which is not possible in self-abasement, only in self* 
exaltation, only in the confidence of being desired and being worthy 
of desire. It is an act that forces him to stand naked in spirit, as well 
as in body, and to accept his real ego as his standard of value. He 
will always be attracted to the woman who reflects his deepest vision 
of himself, the woman whose surrender permits him to experience — 
or to fake— a sense of self-esteem. The man who is proudly certain 
of his own value, will want the highest type of woman he can find, 
the woman he admires, the strongest, the hardest to conquer — 
because only the possession of a heroine will give him the sense of 
an achievement, not the possession of a brainless slut. He does not 
seek to . . . What’s the matter?” he asked, seeing the look on Rear- 
den's face, a look of intensity much beyond mere interest in an 
abstract discussion. 

Go on," said Reardon tensely. 

“He does not seek to gam his value, he seeks to express it. There 
i'- no conflict between the standards of his mind and the desires of 
his body. But the man who is convinced of his own worthlessness 
will be drawn to a woman he despises — because she will reflect his 
own secret self, she will release him from that objective reality in 
which he is a fraud, she will give him a momentary illusion of his 
°wn value and a momentary escape from the moral code that damns 

453 



him. Observe the ugly mess which most men make of their sex 
lives — and observe the mess of contradictions which they hold as 
their moral philosophy. One proceeds from the other. Love is our 
response to our highest values — and can be nothing else. Let a man 
corrupt his values and his view of existence, let him profess that love 
is not self-enjoyment but self-denial, that virtue consists, not of pride, 
but of pity or pain or weakness or sacrifice, that the noblest love is 
bom, not of admiration, but of charity, not in response to values, 
but in response to flaws — and he will have cut himself in two. His 
body will not obey him, it will not respond, it will make him impotent 
toward the woman he professes to love and draw him to the lowest 
type of whore he can find. His body will always follow the ultimate 
logic of his deepest convictions; if he believes that flaws are values, 
he has damned existence as evil and only the evil will attract him. 
He has damned himself and he will feel that depravity is all he is 
worthy of enjoying. He has equated virtue with pain and he will feel 
that vice is the only realm of pleasuie. Then he will scream that his 
body has vicious desires of its own which his mind cannot conquer, 
that sex is sin, that true love is a pure emotion of the spirit. And 
then he will wonder why love brings him nothing but boredom, and 
sex — nothing but shame/' 

Reardon said slowly, looking off. not realizing that he was thinkinu 
aloud, "At least . . I've never accepted that other tenet l\c 
never felt guillv about making money/’ 

Francisco missed the significance of the first two words; he smiled 
and said eagerly, ‘You do see that it's the same issue? No, you d 
never accept any part of their vicious creed. You wouldn't be able 
to force it upon yourself. 11 you tried to damn sex as evil, you'd stdf 
find yourself, against your will, acting on the proper moral premise 
You’d be attracted to the highest woman you met. You'd alwav^ 
want a heroine. You'd be incapable of sclt-contempt You’d be un 
able to believe that existence is evil and that you're a helpless crea- 
ture caught in an impossible universe. You’re the man who’s spent 
his life shaping matter to the purpose of his mind. You’re the man 
who would know that just as an idea unexpressed in physical action 
is contemptible hypocrisy, so is platonic love — and just as physical 
action unguided by an idea is a fool’s self-fraud, so is sex when cut 
off from one's code of values, ft’s the same issue, and you would 
know it. Your inviolate sense of self-esteem would know it. >tou 
would be incapable of desire for a woman you despised. Only the 
man who extols the purity of a love devoid of desire, is capable ol 
the depravity of a desire devoid of love. But observe that most peo- 
ple are creatures cut in half who keep swinging desperately to one 
side or to the other. One kind of half is the man Who despises 
money, factories, skyscrapers and his own body. He holds undefined 
emotions about non-conceivable subjects as the meaniitg of life and 
as his claim to virtue. And he cries with despair, becau;& he can feel 
nothing for the woman he respects, but finds himself 4 bondage to 
an irresistible passion for a slut from the gutter. He is ttje man whom 
people call an idealist. The other kind of half is the man whom 
people call practical, the man who despises principles. j abstractions. 

454 



art, philosophy and his own mind. He regards the acquisition of 
material objects as the only goal of existence — and he laughs at the 
need to consider their purpose or their source. He expects them to 
give him pleasure— and he wonders why the more he gets, the less 
he feels. He is the man who spends his time chasing women. Observe 
the triple fraud which he perpetrates upon himself. He will not ac- 
knowledge his need of self-esteem, since he scoffs at such a concept 
as moial values; yet he feels the profound self-contempt which comes 
from believing that he is a piece of meat. He will not acknowledge, 
but he knows that sex is the physical expression of a tribute to 
personal values. So he tries, by going through the motions of the 
effect, to acquire that which should have been the cause. He tries 
to gain a sense of his own value from the women who surrender to 
him — and he forgets that the women he picks have neither character 
nor judgment nor standard of value. He tells himself that all he’s 
after is physical pleasure — but observe that he tires of his women in 
a week or a night, that he despises professional whores and that he 
loves to imagine he is seducing virtuous girls who make a great 
exception for his sake. It is the feeling ot achievement that he seeks 
and never finds. What glorv can there be in the conquest of a mind- 
less body? Now that is your woman-chaser. Does the description 
tit me'”' 

“(Jod, no!” 

“Then you can judge, without asking my word for it. how much 
chasing of women I've done in my life.*' 

“Hut what on earth have you been doing on the front pages of 
newspapers for the last -isn’t it twelve— years?” 

“I've spent a lot ot money on the most ostentatiously vulgar par- 
ties 1 could think of, and a miserable amount ot time on being seen 
with the appropriate sort of women. As tor the rest — ” He stopped, 
then said. “I have some friends who know this, but you are the first 
person to whom I am confiding it against my own rules: I have never 
slept with any of those women, f have never touched one of them.” 

“What is more incredible than that, is that I believe you,” 

The lamp on the floor beside him threw broken bits of light across 
Francisco’s face, as he leaned forward, the face had a look of guiltless 
amusement. “If you care to glance over those front pages, you'll see 
that I’ve never said anything. It was the women who were eager to 
ru^h into print with stones insinuating that being seen with me at a 
restaurant was the sign of a great romance. What do you suppose 
those women are after but the same thing as the chaser — the desire 
to gam their own value from the number and fame of the men they 
conquer? Only it's one step phonier, because the value they seek is 
not even in the actual fact, but in the impression on and the envy 
of other women. Well, 1 gave those bitches what they wanted- -but 
what they literally wanted, without the pretense that they expected, 
the pretense that hides from them the nature of tbeir wish, Do you 
think they wanted to sleep with me or with any man? They wouldn't 
he capable of so real and honest a desire. They wanted food for 
their vanity — and l gave it to them. I gave them the chance to boast 
to their friends and to see themselves in the scandal sheets in the 

455 



roles of great seductress. But do you know that it works in exactly 
the same way as what you did at your trial? If you want to defeat 
any kind of vicious fraud — comply with it literally, adding nothing 
of your own to disguise its nature. Those women understood. They 
saw whether there's any satisfaction in being envied by others for a 
feat. one has not achieved. Instead of self-esteem, their publicized 
romances with me have given them a deeper sense of inferiority: 
each one of them knows that she’s tried and tailed. If dragging me 
into bed is supposed to be her public standard of value, she knows 
that she couldn’t live up to it. i think those women hate me more 
than any other man on earth. But my secret is safe — because each 
one of them thinks that she was the only one who failed, while all 
the others succeeded, so she’ll be the more vehement in swearing to 
our romance and will never admit the truth to anybody.” 

“But what have you done to your own reputation?” 

Francisco shrugged. “Those whom I respect, will know the truth 
about me, sooner or later. The others”— his face hardened — “the 
others consider that which l really am as evil. Let them have what 
they prefer — what I appear to be on the front pages.” 

“But what for? Why did >ou do it? Just to teach them a lesson?” 

“Hell, no! I wanted to be known as a playboy.” 

“Why?” 

“A playboy is a man who just can’t help letting money run through 
his fingers.” 

“Why did you want to assume such an ugly sort of role?” 

“Camouflage.” 

“For what?” 

“For a purpose of my own.” 

“What purpose?” 

Francisco shook his head. “Don’t ask me to tell you that. Lve 
told you mor6 than I should. You’ll come to know the rest of it 
soon, anyway.” 

“If it’s more than you should, why did you tell me?” 

“Because, . . you’ve made me become impatient for the first time 
in years.” The note of a suppressed emotion came back into his 
voice. “Because I’ve never wanted anyone to know the truth about 
me as l wanted you to know it. Because 1 knew that you’d despise 
a playboy more than any other sort of man — as I would, too Play- 
boy? I've never loved but one woman in my life and still do and 
always will 1 ” It was an involuntary break, and he added, his voice 
low, “I've never confessed that to anyone . . . not even to her.” 

“Have you lost her?” 

Francisco sat looking off into space; in a moment, he answered 
toneiessly, “I hope not.” 

The light of the lamp hit his face from below, and ReaiiJen could 
not sec his eyes, only his mouth drawn in lines of endufance and 
oddly solemn resignation. Reardcn knew that this was a vtound not 
to be probed any further. 

With one of his swift changes of mt>od, Francisco said, f‘Oh well, 
it's just a little longer!” and rose to his feet, smiting. 

“Since you trust me.” said Reardcn* “1 want to tell yo|i a secret 

456 



of mine in exchange. I want you to know how much 1 trusted you 
before I came here. And l might need your help later, 1 " 

“You’re the only man left whom Pd like to help.” 

“There’s a great deal that 1 don’t understand about you, but I’m 
certain of one thing: that you’re not a friend of the looters/’ 

“I’m not.” There was a hint of amusement in Francisco’s face, as 
at an understatement. 

“So l know that you won’t betray me if I tell you that Pm going 
to continue selling Rearden Metal to customers of my own choice 
in any amount I wish, whenever 1 see a chance to do it. Right now. 
I’m getting ready to pour an order twenty times the s tec of the one 
they tried me for.” 

Sitting on the arm of a chair, a few feet away, Francisco leaned 
torward to look at him silently, frowning, for a long moment. “Do 
you think that you're fighting them by doing it?” he asked. 

“Well, what would you call it? Co-operating?” 

“You were willing to work and produce Rearden Metal for them 
at the price of losing your profits, losing your friends, enriching stray 
bastards who had the pull to rob you, and taking their abuse for the 
privilege of keeping them alive. Now you’re willing to do it at the 
pnee of accepting the position of a criminal and the risk of being 
thrown m jail at any moment — for the sake of keeping in existence 
a system which can be kept going only by its victims, only by the 
breaking of its own laws,” 

“It’s not for their system, but for customers whom 1 can’t abandon 
to the mercy ot their system — I intend to outlast that system of 
theirs — 1 don’t intend to let them stop me, no matter how hard they 
make it for me— and I don’t intend to give up the world to them, 
even it 1 am the last man left. Right now, that illegal order is more 
important to me than the whole of my mills.” 

Francisco shook his head slowly and did not answer; then he asked, 

' To which one of your friends in the copper industry are you going 
to give the valuable privilege of informing on you this time?” 

Rearden smiled. “Not this time. This time. Pm dealing with a man 
I can trust,” 

“Really? Who is it?” 

“You.” 

Francisco sat up straight. “What?” he asked, his voice so low that 
lie almost succeeded in hiding the sound of a gasp. 

Rearden was smiling. “You didn’t know that Pm one of your 
customers now? It was done through a couple of stooges and under 
a phony name— but PH need your help to prevent anyone on your 
staff from becoming inquisitive about it, 1 need that copper, I need 
it on time —and 1 don’t care if they arrest me later, so long as 1 get 
this through. 1 know that you've, lost all concern for your company, 
\our wealth, your work, because you don’t care to deal with looters 
Taggart and Hoyle. But if you meant all the things you taught 
me, it I am the last man left whom you respect, you’ll help me to 
survive and to beat them. I’ve never asked for anyone’s help. Pm 
^kirtg tor yours. 1 need you. t trust you. You’ve always professed 
vour admiration for me. Well, there’s my life in your hands — if you 

457 



want it. An order of d’Anconia copper is being shipped to me right 
now. It left San Juan on December fifth.” 

"What?!” 

It was a scream of plain shock. Francisco had shot to his feet, past 
any attempt to hide anything. “On December fifth?" 

“Yes." said Rearden, stupefied. 

Francisco leaped to the telephone. “I told you not to deal with 
d’Anconia Copper!" It was the half-moaning, half-furious cry of 
despair. 

His hand was reaching for the telephone, but jerked back. He 
grasped the edge of the table, as if to stop himself from lifting the 
receiver, and he stood, head down, for how long a time neither he 
nor Rearden could tell. Rearden was held numb by the fact of watch- 
ing an agonized struggle with the motionless figure of a man as its 
only evidence. He could not guess the nature of the struggle, he 
knew only that there was something which Francisco had the power 
to prevent in that moment and that it was a power which he would 
not use. 

When Francisco raised his head, Rearden saw a face drawn by so 
great a suffering that its lines were almost an audible cry of pain, 
the more terrible because the face had a look of firmness, as if the 
decision had been made and this was the price ot it, 

“Francisco . . . what’s the matter?” 

“Hank, I . . He shook his head, stopped, then stood up straight, 
“Mr. Rearden," he said, in a voice that had the strength, the despan 
and the peculiar dignity of a plea he knew to be hopeless, “for the 
time when you're going to damn me, when you're going to doubt 
every word 1 said . . I swear to you — by the woman 1 love -that l 
am your friend." 

The memory of Francisco's face as it looked in that moment, came 
back to Rearden three days later, through a blinding shock of loss 
and hatred — U came back, even though, standing by the radio in his 
office, he thought that he must now keep away from the Wayne- 
Falkland or he would kill Francisco d’Anconia on sight — it kept com- 
ing back to him, through the words he was hearing— -he was hearing 
that three ships ot d'Anconia copper, bound Irom San Juan to New 
York, had been attacked by Ragnar Danneskjold and sent to the 
bottom of the ocean— it kept coming back, even though he knew thru 
much more than the copper had gone down for him with those shipv 


Chapter V ACCOUNT OVERDRAWN 

It was the first failure in the history of Rearden Steel For the first 
time, an order was not delivered as promised. Bui by February 15, 
when the Taggart rail was due, it made no difference tn anyone 
any longer. 

Winter had come early, in the last days of November. ^People said 
that it was the hardest winter on record and that no o$e could be 
blamed for the unusual severity of the snowstorms. They did not 
care to remember that there had been a time when snoWstorms did 

458 



not sweep, unresisted, down unlighted rends and upon the roofs of 
unheated houses, did not stop the movement of trains, did not leave 
a wake of corpses counted by the hundreds. 

The first time that Danagger Coal was late in delivering fuel to 
Taggart Transcontinental, in the last week of December, Danagger’s 
cousin explained that he could not help it; he had had to cut the 
workday down to six hours, he said, in order to raise the morale of 
the men who did not seem to function as they had in the days of 
his cousin Kenneth; the men had become listless and sloppy, he said, 
because they were exhausted by the harsh discipline of the former 
management; he could not help it if some of the superintendents and 
foremen had quit him without reason, men who had been with the 
company for ten to twenty years; he could not help it if there seemed 
to be some friction between his workers and his new supervisory 
slatf, even though the new men were much more liberal than the 
old slave drivers; it was only a matter of readjustment, he said. He 
could not help it, he said, il the tonnage intended for Taggart Trans- 
continental had been turned over, on the eve of its scheduled deliv- 
ery, to the Bureau of Global Relic! for shipment to the People’s 
State of Lngland; it was an emergency, the people o( England were 
starving, with all of their Slate factories dosing down— -and Miss 
Taggart was being unreasonable, since it was only a matter of one 
day’s delay, 

ll was only one day's delay. It caused a three days' delay in the 
run of Freight Train Number .*86, bound from California to New 
York with (Uly-nme carloads of lettuce and oranges. Freight Train 
Number 386 waited on sidings, at coaling stations, for the fuel that 
had not arrived. When the train reached New York, the lettuce and 
oranges had to be dumped into the Hast River: they had waited their 
turn too long in the freight houses of California, with the train sched- 
ules cut and the engines forbidden, by directive, to pull a train of 
more than sixty cars. Nobody but their friends and trade associates 
noticed that three orange growers in California went out of business, 
as well as two lettuce farmers in Imperial Valley: nobody noticed 
I he closing of a commission house m New York, of a plumbing com- 
pany to which the commission house owed money, of a lead pipe 
wholesaler who had supplied the plumbing company. When people 
were starving, said the newspapers, one did not have to feel concern 
over the failures of business enterprises which were only private 
ventures for private profit. 

The coal shipped across the Atlantic by the Bureau of Global 
Relief did not reach the People’s State of England: it was seized by 
Kagnar Danncskjftld. 

The second time that Danagger Coal was late in delivering fuel to 
Taggart Transcontinental, in mid-January, DanaggeCs cousin snarled 
over the telephone that he could not help it: his mines had been 
s hut down for three days, due to a shortage of lubricating oil for the 
machinery. The supply of coal to Taggart Transcontinental was four 
days late. 

Mr. Quinn, of the Quinn Ball Bearing Company which had once 
moved ’from Connecticut to Colorado, waited a week for the freight 

459 



train that carried his order to Rearden Steel. When the train arrived, 
the doors of the Quinn Ball Bearing Company’s plant were closed. 

Nobody traced the closing of a motor company in Michigan, that 
bad waited for a shipment of ball bearings, its machinery idle, its 
workers on full pay; or the closing of a sawmill in Oregon, that had 
waited for a new motor, or the dosing of a lumber yard in Iowa, 
left without supply; or the bankruptcy of a building contractor in 
Illinois who, failing to get his lumber on time, found his contracts 
cancelled and the purchasers of his homes sent wandering off down 
snowswept roads in search of that which did not exist anywhere 
any longer. 

The snowstorm that came at the end of January blocked the passes 
through the Rocky Mountains, raising white walls thirty feet high 
across the main-line track of Taggart Transcontinental. The men who 
attempted to clear the track gave up within the first few hours: the 
rotary plows broke down, one after another: The plows had been 
kept in precarious repair for two years past the span of their use- 
fulness. The new plows had not been delivered: the manufacturer 
had quit, unable to'obtain the steel he needed from Orren Boyle. 

Three westbound trains were trapped on the sidings of Winston 
Station, high in the Rockies, where the main line of Taggart Trans- 
continental cut across the northwest corner of Colorado. For five 
days, they remained beyond the reach of help. Trains could not ap- 
proach them through the storm. The last of the trucks made by 
Lawrence Hammond broke down on the frozen grades of the moun- 
tain highways. The best of the airplanes once made by Dwight Sand- 
ers were sent out. but never reached Winston Station; they were 
worn past the stage of fighting a storm. 

Through the driving mesh of snow, the passengers trapped aboard 
the trains looked out at the lights of Winston's shanties. The lights 
died in the night of the second day. By the evening of the third, the 
lights, the heat and the food had given out aboard the trains. In the 
brief lulls of the storm, when the white mesh vanished and left be- 
hind it the’stiilness of a black void merging a lightless earth with a 
starless sky — the passengers could see, many miles away to the south, 
a small tongue of flame twisting in the wind. It was Wyatt’s Torch 

By the morning of the sixth day, when the trains were able to 
move and proceeded down the slopes of Utah, of Nevada, of Califor- 
nia, the trainmen observed the smokeless stacks and the closed doors 
of small tracksidc factories, which had not been closed on their 
last run. 

"Storms are an act of God,*’ wrote Bertram Scudder, "and nobody 
can be held socially responsible for the weather.” 

The rations of coal, established by Wesley Mouch, permitted the 
heating of homes for three hours a day. There was no wood to burn, 
no metal to make new stoves, no tools to pierce the vialls of the 
houses for new installations. In makeshift contraptions off bricks and 
oil cans, professors were burning the books of their libraries, and 
fruit-growers were burning the trees of their orchards. ^Privations 
strengthen a people’s spirit,” wrote Bertram Scudder, “and forge the 

460 



fine steel of social discipline. Sacrifice is the cement which unites 
human bricks into the great edifice of society/’ 

“The nation which had once held the creed that greatness is 
achieved by production* is now told that il is achieved by squalor,” 
said Francisco d’Ancoma in a press interview. But this was not 
printed. 

The only business boom, that winter, came to the amusement in- 
dustry. People wrenched their pennies out of the quicksands of their 
food and heat budgets, and went without meals in order to crowd 
into movie theaters, in order to escape for a few hours the state of 
animals reduced to the single concern of terror over their crudest 
needs. In January, all movie theaters, night dubs and bowling alleys 
were closed by order of Wesley Mouch. for the purpose of conserv- 
ing fuel. “Pleasure is not an essential of existence,” wrote Bertram 
Scudder. 

“You must learn to take a philosophical attitude,” said Dr. Simon 
Pritchett to a young girl student who broke down into sudden, hys- 
terical sobs in the middle of a lecture. She had just returned from a 
volunteer relief expedition to a settlement on Lake Superior; she 
had seen a mother holding the body of a grown son who had died 
of hunger. “There are no absolutes,” said Dr. Pritchett. “Reality is 
only an illusion. How does that woman know that her son is dead? 
How does she know that he ever existed?” 

People with pleading eyes and despciate faces crowded into tents 
where evangelists cried in triumphant gloating that man was unable 
to cope with nature, that his science was a fraud, that his mind was 
a failure, that he was reaping punishment for the sin of pride, for 
his confidence in his own intellect ~ and that only faith in the power 
of mystic secrets could protect him from the fissure of a rail or from 
the blowout of the last tire on his last truck. Love was the key to 
the mystic secrets, they cried, love and selfless sacrifice to the needs 
of others. 

Orren Boyle made a selfless sacrifice to the needs of others. He 
sold to the Bureau ol Global Relief, for shipment to the People's 
State of Germany, ten thousand tons of structural steel shapes that 
had been intended for the Atlantic Southern Railroad, “tl was a 
difficult decision to make,” he said, with a moist, unfocused look of 
righteousness, to the panic-stricken president of the Atlantic South- 
ern, “but l weighed the fact that you're a rich corporation, while the 
people of Germany are in a state of unspeakable misery. So l acted 
on the principle that need comes first. When in doubt, it’s the weak 
that must be considered, not the strong.” The president of the Atlan- 
tic Southern had heard that Orren Boyle’s most valuable friend in 
Washington had a friend m the Ministry of Supply of the People/s 
State of Germany. But whether this had been Boyle’s motive or 
whether it had been the principle of sacrifice, no one could tell and 
it made no difference: if Boyle had been a saint of the creed of 
selflessness, he would have had to do precisely what he had done. 
This silenced the president of the Atlantic Southern; he dared not 
admit that he cared for his railroad more than for the people of 
Germany; he dared not argue against the principle of sacrifice. 

461 



The waters of the Mississippi had been rising all through the 
month of January, swollen by the storms, driven by the wind into a 
restless grinding of current and against every obstruction in their 
way. On a night of lashing sleet, in the first week of February, the 
Mississippi bridge of the Atlantic Southern collapsed under a passen- 
ger train. The engine and the first live sleepers went down with the 
cracking girders into the twisting black spirals of water eighty feet 
below. The rest of the train remained on the fir-$t three spans of the 
bridge, which held. 

“You can’t have your cake and let your neighbor eat it, too,” said 
Francisco d’Anconia. The fury of denunciations which the holders 
of public voices unleashed against him was greater than their concern 
over the horror at the river. 

It was whispered that the chief engineer of the Atlantic Southern, 
in despair over the company’s failure to obtain the steel he needed 
to reinforce the bridge, had resigned six months ago, telling the com- 
pany that the bridge was unsafe. He had written a letter to the 
largest newspaper in New York, warning the public about it; the 
letter had not been printed. It was whispered that the first three 
spans of the bridge had held because they had been reinforced with 
structural shapes of Rearden Metal; but five hundred tons of the 
Metal was all that the railroad had been able to obtain under the 
Fair Share Law. 

As the sole result of official investigations, two bridges across the 
Mississippi, belonging to smaller railroads, were condemned. One of 
the railroads went out of business; the other closed a branch line, 
tore up its rail and laid a track to the Mississippi bridge of Taggart 
Transcontinental; so did the Atlantic Southern. 

The great Taggart Bridge at Bedford, Illinois, had been built by 
Nathaniel Taggart. He had fought the government for years, because 
the courts had ruled, on the complaint of river shippers, that rail- 
roads were a destructive competition to shipping and thus a threat 
to the public welfare, and that railroad bridges across the Mississippi 
were to be 'forbidden as a material obstruction; the courts had or- 
dered Nathamal Taggart to tear down his bridge and to carry his 
passengers across the river by means of barges. He had won that 
battle by a majority of one voice on the Supreme Court. His bridge 
was now the only major link left to hold the continent together. His 
last descendant had made it her strictest rule that whatever else 
was neglected, the Taggart Bridge would always be maintained in 
flawless shape. 

The steel shipped across the Atlantic by the Bureau of Global 
Relief had not reached the People s State of Germany. It had been 
seized by Ragnar Danneskjdld — but nobody heard of it qutsidc the 
Bureau, because the newspapers had long since stopped Mentioning 
the activities of Ragnar Danneskjdld. 

It was not until the public began to notice the growing shortage, 
then the disappearance from the market of electric ironjs, toasters, 
washing machines and all electrical appliances, that pcopfc began to 
ask questions and to hear whispers. They heard that no Aitp loaded 

462 



with d’Anconia copper was able to reach a port of the United States; 
it could not get past Ragnar Danneskjdld. 

In the foggy winter nights, on the waterfront, sailors whispered 
the story that Ragnar Danneskjdld always seized the cargoes of relief 
vessels, but never touched the copper: he sank the d’Anconta ships 
with their loads; he let the crews escape in lifeboats, but the copper 
went to the bottom of the ocean. They whispered it as a dark legend 
beyond men’s power to explain; nobody could find a reason why 
DanneskjOld did not choose to lake the copper. 

In the second week of February, for the purpose of conserving 
copper wire and electric power, a directive forbade the running of 
elevators above the twenty-fifth floor. The upper floors of the build- 
ings had to be vacated, and partitions of unpainted boards went up 
to cut off the stairways. By special permit, exceptions were granted — 
on the grounds of “essential need” — to a few of the larger business 
enterprises and the more fashionable hotels. The tops of the cities 
were cut down. 

The inhabitants of New York had never had to be aware of the 
weather. Storms had been only a nuisance that slowed the traffic and 
made puddles m the doorways of brightly lighted shops. Stepping 
against the wind, dressed in raincoats, furs and evening slippers, peo- 
ple had felt that a storm was an intruder within the city. Now. facing 
the gusts of snow that came sweeping down the narrow streets, peo- 
ple felt in dim terror that they were the temporary intruders and 
that the wind had the right-of-way. 

“It won't make any difference to us now, torget it. Hank, it doesn't 
matter,” said Dagny when Rearden told her that he would not be 
able to deliver the rail; he had not been able to find a supplier of 
copper “Forget it. Hank ” He did not answer her. He could not 
torget the first failure of Rearden Steel. 

On the evening of February 15, a plate cracked on a rail joint and 
sent an engine off the track, half a mile from Winston, Colorado, 
on a division which was to have been relaid with the new rail. The 
station agent of Winston sighed and sent for a crew with a crane; it 
was only one of the minor accidents that were happening in his 
section every other day or so, he was getting used to it 

Rearden, that evening, his coat collar raised, his hat slanted low 
over his eyes, the snow drifts rising to his knees, was tramping 
through an abandoned open-pit coal mine, in a forsaken corner of 
Pennsylvania, supervising the loading of pirated coal upon the trucks 
which he had provided. Nobody owned the mine, nobody could af- 
ford the cost of working it. But a young man with a brusque voice 
and dark, angry eyes, who came from a starving settlement, had 
organized a gang of the unemployed and made a deal with Rearden 
to deliver the coal. They mined it at night, they stored it in hidden 
culverts, they were paid in cash, with no questions asked or an- 
swered Guilty of a fierce desire to remain alive, they and Rearden 
traded like savages, without rights, titles, contracts or protection, 
with nothing but mutual understanding and a ruthlessly absolute ob- 
servance of one’s given word. Rearden did not even know the name 
of the* young leader. Watching him at the job of loading the track***, 

m 



Rearden thought that this boy. if born a generation earlier, would 
have become a great industrialist: now, he would probably end his 
brief life as a plain criminal in a few more years. 

Dagny, that evening, was facing a meeting of the Taggart Board 
of Directors. 

They sat about a polished table in a stately Board room which 
was inadequately heated. The men who, through the decades of their 
careers, had relied for their security upon keeping their faces blank, 
their words inconclusive and their clothes impeccable, were thrown 
off-key by the sweaters stretched over their stomachs, by the mufllers 
wound about their necks, by the sound of coughing that cut through 
the discussion too frequently, like the rattle of a machine gun 

She noted that Jim had lost the smoothness of his usual perfor- 
mance. He sat with his head drawn into his shoulders, and his eyes 
kept darting too rapidly from face to face. 

A man from Washington sal at the table among them. Nobody 
knew his exact job or title, but it was not necessary: they knew that 
he was the man from Washington. His name was Mr. Weatherby, 
he had graying temples, a long, narrow face and a mouth that looked 
as if he had to stretch his facial muscles in order to keep it closed; 
this gave a suggestion of primness to a face that displayed nothing 
else. The Directors did not know whether he was present as the 
guest, the adviser or the ruler of the Board; they preferred not to 
find out. 

‘it seems to me." said the chairman, “that the top problem for 
us to consider is the fact that the track of our main line appears to 
be in a deplorable, not to say critical, condition — “ He paused, then 
added cautiously, “—while the only good rail we own is that of the 
John Galt — I mean, the Rio Norte™ Line." 

In the same cautious tone of waiting for someone else to pick up 
the intended purpose of his words* another man said, “If we consider 
our critical shortage of equipment, and if we consider that wc are 
letting it wear out in the service of a branch line running at a loss™" 
He stopped .and did not state what would occur if they considered it. 

“In my opinion," said a thin, pallid man with a neat mustache, 
“the Rio Norte Line seems to have become a financial burden which 
the company might not be able to carry — that is, not unless certain 
readjustments arc made, which — " He did not finish, but glanced at 
Mr. Weatherby. Mr. Weatherby looked as if he had not noticed it. 

“Jim," said the chairman, “1 think you might explain the picture 
to Mr. Weatherby." 

Taggart's voice still retained a practiced smoothness, but it was 
the smoothness of a piece of cloth stretched tight over a broken 
glass object, and the sharp edges showed through once in a while: 
“i think it is generally conceded that the main factor attesting every 
railroad in the country is the unusual rate of business failures. While 
we all realize, of course, that this is only temporary, stjil, for the 
moment, it has made the railroad situation approach a (stage that 
may well be described as desperate. Specifically, the numjher of fac- 
tories which have closed throughout the territory of tlje Taggart 
Transcontinental system is so large that it has wrecked four entire 

464 



financial structure. Districts and divisions which had always brought 
us our steadiest revenues, are now showing an actual operating loss, 
A train schedule geared to a heavy volume of freight cannot be 
maintained for three shippers where there had once been seven. We 
cannot give them the same service — at least; not at . . , our present 
rates.'’ He glanced at Mr. Weatherby, but Mr. Weatherby did not 
seem to notice. "It seems to me,” said Taggart, the sharp edges 
becoming sharper in his voice, "that the stand taken by our shippers 
is unfair, Most of them have been complaining about their competi- 
tors and have passed various local measures to eliminate competition 
in their particular fields. Now most of them are practically in sole 
possession of their markets, yet they refuse to realize that a railroad 
cannot give to one lone factory the freight rates which had been 
made possible bv the production of a whole region. We are running 
our trains for them at a loss, yet they have taken a stand against 
any . . . raise in rates ” 

"Against any raise'*" said Mr. Weatherby mildly, with a good imi- 
tation of astonishment. "That is not the stand they have taken.” 

"It certain rumors, which 1 refuse to credit, are true — ” said the 
chairman, and slopped one syllable after the tone of panic had be- 
come obvious in his voice. 

"Jim,” said Mr. Weatherby pleasantly, "I think it would be best 
if we just didn't mention the subject of raising the rates.” 

i wasn’t suggesting an actual raise at this time,” said Taggart 
hastily. "I merely referred to it to round out the picture.” 

‘But, Jim,” said an old man with a quavering voice, "l thought 
that your influence— I mean, your friendship — with Mr. Mouch 
would ensure . ” 

He stopped, because the others were looking at him severely, in 
icproof for the breach of an unwritten law: one did not mention a 
failure of this kind, one did not discuss the mysterious ways of Jim’s 
powerful friendships or why they had failed him. 

"Fact is,” said Mr. Weatherby easily, "that Mr. Mouch sent me 
here to discuss the demand of the railway unions for a raise in wages 
and the demand of the shippers lor a cut in rates.” 

He said it in a tone of casual firmness; he knew that all these men 
had known it. that the demands had been discussed in the newspa- 
pers for months; he knew that the dread in these men’s minds was 
not of the fact, but of his naming it— as if the fact had not existed, 
hut his words heltl the power to make it exist; he knew that they 
hud waited to see whether he would exercise that power; he was 
kiting them know that he would, - 

l heir situation warranted an oulcty of protest; there was none; 
nobody answered him. Then James Taggart said in that biting, ner- 
vous tone which is intended to convey anger, but merely confesses 
uncertainty, "1 wouldn't exaggerate the importance of Buzzy Watts 
ol tfie National Shippers Council, He's been making a lot of noise 
and giving a lot of expensive dinners in Washington, but I wouldn’t 
advise taking it too seriously.” 

‘Oh, 1 don’t know,” said Mr. Weatherby, 

465 



“Listen, Clem, T do know that Wesley refused to see him last 
week.” 

“That's true. Wesley is a pretty busy man." 

“And l know that when Gene Lawson gave that big party ten 
days ago, practically everybody was there, but Buzzy Watts was 
not invited/' 

“That's so," said Mr. Weatherby peaceably. 

“So I wouldn’t bet on Mr Buz/y Walts, Clem. And l wouldn't let 
it worry me." 

“Wesley’s an impartial man." said Mr. Weatherby. “A man de- 
voted to public duty, it’s the interests of the country as a whole that 
he's got to consider above everything else." Taggart sat up; of alt 
the danger signs he knew, this line of talk was the worst. “Nobody 
can deny it, Jim, that Wesley feels a high regard for you as an 
enlightened businessman, a valuable adviser and one of his closest 
personal friends." Taggart's eyes shot to him swiftly: this was still 
worse. “But nobody can say that Wesley would hesitate to sacrifice 
his personal feelings and friendships— where the welfare of the public 
is concerned/’ 

Taggart’s face remained blank: his terror came from things never 
allowed to reach expression in words or in facial muscles. The terror 
was his struggle against an unadmitted thought: he himself had been 
“the public" for so long and in so many different issues, that he 
knew what it would mean if that magic title, that sacred title no one 
dared to oppose, were transferred, along with its “welfare," to the 
person of Buzzy Watts 

But what he asked, and he asked it hastily, was, “You're not im 
plying that I would place my personal interests above the public 
welfare, are you?" 

“No. of course not," said Mr. Weatherby, with a look that was 
almost a smile. “Certainly not. Not you, Jim. Your public-spirited 
attitude — and understanding- -are too well known. That’s why Wes- 
ley expects you to see every side of the picture." 

“Yes, of course," said Taggart, trapped. 

“Well, consider the unions’ side of it. Maybe you can't afford t<» 
give them a raise, but how can they afford to exist when the cost ol 
living has shot sky-high? They’ve got to eat. don’t they 7 That comes 
first, railroad or no railroad." Mr. Wealherby’s tone had a kind of 
placid righteousness, as if he were reciting a formula required lu 
convey another meaning, dear to all of them; he was looking stiaight 
at Taggart, in special emphasis of the unstated. “There are almost a 
million members in the railway unions With families, dependents 
and poor relatives— and, who hasn't got poor relatives these days? - 
it amounts to about live million voles. Persons, l mean. Wesley has 
to bear that in mind. He has to think of their psychology. And then, 
consider the public. The rales you’re charging were established at a 
time when everybody was making money. But the things arc 
now, the cost of transportation has become a burden ; nobody can 
afford. People are screaming about it all over the country." He 
looked straight at Taggart; he merely looked, but his glance had the 
quality of a wink. “There's an awfuMot of them, Jim. They're not 

466 



very happy at the moment about an awful lot of things. A govern- 
ment that would bring the railroad rates down would make a lot of 
folks grateful.’* 

The silence that answered him was like a hole so deep that no 
sound could be heard of the things crashing down to its bottom. 
Taggart knew, as they all knew, to what disinterested motive Mr. 
Mouch would always be Teady to sacrifice his personal friendships. 

It was the silence and the fact that she did not want to say it, had 
come here resolved not to speak, but could not resist it, that made 
Dagny’s voice sound so vibrantly harsh: 

“Got what you’ve been asking for, all these years, gentlemen?” 

The swiftness with which their eyes moved to her was an involun- 
tarv answer to an unexpected sound, but the swiftness with which 
they moved away — to look down at the table, at the walls, anywhere 
but at her— was the conscious answer to the meaning of the sounds. 

In the silence of the next moment, she felt their resentment like 
a starch thickening the air of the room, and she knew that it was 
not resentment against Mr. Weatherby, but against her. She could 
have borne it. if they had merely let her question go unanswered; 
but what made her feel a sickening tightness in her stomach, was 
their double iraud of pretending to ignore her and then answering 
in their own kind of mannet. 

The chairman said, not looking at her, his voice pointedly noncom- 
mittal, vet vaguely purposeful at the same time, “It would have been 
all right, everything would have worked out fine, it it weren't for 
the wrong people m positions of power, such as Bu/zy Walts and 
Thick Morrison.” 

“Oh. I wouldn’t worn about < hick Morrison,” said the pallid man 
with the mustache. “He hasn’t any lop-level connections. Not really. 
!t\ imkv Holloway that’s poison.” 

"I don’t see the picture as hopeless,” said a portly man who wore 
a green muffler. “Joe Dunphy and Bud Ha/leton are very dose to 
Wesley, If their influence prevails, we'll be all right. However, Kip 
( halmers and Tinky Holloway are dangerous.” 

“1 can take care of Kip Chalmers," said Taggart. 

Mr. Weatheihv was the only person in the room who did not 
mind looking at Dugny: but whenever his glance rested upon her. it 
registered nothing; she was the only person in the room whom he 
Hul not see. 

“I am thinking,” said Mr. Weatherby casually, looking at Taggart, 
‘that you might do Wesley a favor.” 

“Wesley knows that he can always count on me." 

“Well, my thought is that if you granted the unions’ wage raises — 
we might drop the question of cutting the rates, for the time being.” 

“I can't do that!” It was almost a cry. “The National Alliance of 
Kmlroads has taken a unanimous stand against the raises and has 
committed every member to refuse.” 

“That’s just what 1 mean,” said Mr. Weatherby softly. “Wesley 
needs to drive a wedge into that Alliance stand. If a railroad like 
Taggart Transcontinental were to give in, the rest would be easy. 
You would help Wesley a great deal: He would appreciate it,” 

467 



^But* good God, Clem! — I’d be open to court action for it, by the 
Alliance rules!” 

Mr. Weatherby smiled. “What court? Let Wesley take care of 
that” 

“But listen, Clem, you know — you know just as well as 1 do — that 
we can't afford it!” 

Mr. Weatherby shrugged. “That’s a problem for you to work out.” 

“How, for Christ's sake?” 

“1 don't know. That's your job, not ours. You wouldn't want the 
government to start telling you how to run your railroad, would 
you?” 

“No, of course not! But — ” 

“Our job is only to see that the people get fair wages and decent 
transportation. It's up to you to deliver. But, of course, if you say 
that you can't do the job, why then — ” 

“l haven't said it!” Taggart cried hastily. “1 haven't said it at all!” 

“Good,” said Mr. Weatherby pleasantly. “We know that you have 
the ability to find some way to do it.” 

He was looking at Taggart; Taggart was looking at Dagny. 

“Well, it was just a thought,” said Mr. Weatherby, leaning back 
in his chair in a manner of modest withdrawal. “Just a thought for 
you to mull over. I’m only a guest here. 1 don't want to interfere. 
The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the situation of the . . . 
branch lines, 1 believe?” 

“Yes,” said the chairman and sighed. “Yes. Now if anyone has a 
constructive suggestion to offer — ” He waited; no one answered; “I 
believe the picture is clear to all of us.” He wailed. “It seems to be 
established that wc cannot continue to afford the operation of some 
of our branch lines . the Rio Norte Line in particular . . . and, 
therefore, some form of action seems to be indicated. ...” 

“I think,” said the pallid man with the mustache, his voice unex- 
pectedly confident, “that we should now hear from Miss Taggart.” 
He leaned forward with a look of hopeful craftiness. As Dagny did 
not answer, but merely turned to him, he asked, “What do you have 
to say. Miss Taggart?” 

“Nothing.” 

“1 beg your pardon?” 

“All I had to say was contained in the report which Jim has read 
to you.” She spoke quietly, her voice clear and flat. 

“But you did not make any recommendations.” 

“I have none to make.” 

“But, after all, as our Operating Vice-President, you have a vital 
interest in the policies of this railroad.” 

“I have no authority over the policies of this railroad.” 

“Oh, but we are anxious to consider your opinion.” 

“I have no opinions,” 

“Miss Taggart,” he said, m the smoothly formal tone ^>f an order, 
“you cannot fail to realize that our branch lines are running at a 
disastrous deficit—and that we expect you to make them pay.” 

“How?” 

i don’t know. That is your job, not ours.” 

468 



“t have stated in my report the reasons why that is now impossible. 
If there are facts which I have overlooked, please name them/ 1 

“Oh, I wouldn’t know. We expect you to find some way to make 
it possible. Our job is onty to see that the stockholders get a fair 
profit. It's up to you to deliver. You wouldn't want us to think that 
you’re unable to do the job and—” 

“1 am unable to do it.’ 1 

The man opened his mouth, but found nothing else to say; he 
looked at her in bewilderment, wondering why the formula had 
tailed. 

“Miss Taggart," asked the man with the green muffler, “did you 
imply in your report that the situation of the Rio Norte Line was 
critical?” 

“1 stated that it was hopeless.” 

“Then what action do you propose?” 

“1 propose nothing.” 

“Aren’t you evading a responsibility?” 

“What is it that you think you’re doing?” She spoke evenly, ad- 
dressing them all: “Are you counting on my not saying that the 
responsibility is yours, that it was your goddamn policies that brought 
us where we are? Well, I’m saying it.” 

“Miss Taggart, Miss Taggart,” said the chairman in a tone of 
pleading reproach, “there shouldn’t be any hard feelings among us. 
Does n matter now who was to blame? We don't want to quarrel 
over past mistakes. We must all pull together as a team to carry our 
railroad through this desperate emergency.” 

A gray- haired man of patrician bearing, who had remained silent 
throughout the session, with a look of the quietly bitter knowledge 
that the entire performance was lufile, glanced at Dagny tn a way 
which would have been sympathy had he still felt a remnant of hope. 
He said, raising his voice just enough to betray a note of controlled 
indignation, “Mr. Chairman, if it is practical solutions that we arc 
considering, 1 should like to suggest that we discuss the limitation 
placed upon the length and speed of our trains. Of any single prac- 
tice, that is the most disastrous one. Its repeal would not solve all of 
our problems, but it would be an enormous relief. With the desperate 
shortage of motive power and the appalling shortage of fuel, it is 
criminal insanity to send an engine out on the road with sixty cars 
when it could pull a hundred and to take four days on a run which 
could be made in three. 1 suggest that we compute the number of 
shippers we have ruined and the districts we have destroyed through 
the failures, shortages and delays of transportation, and then we — ” 

“Don’t think of it,” Mr. Weatherby cut in snappily. “Don't try 
di earning about any repeals. We wouldn’t consider it. We wouldn’t 
even consider listening to any talk on the subject.” 

“Mr. Chairman,” the gray- haired man asked quietly, “shall I 
continue?” 

The chairman spread out his hands, with a smooth smile, indicating 
helplessness. “It would be impractical,” he answered. 

“I think we'd better confine the discussion to the status of the Rio 
Norte' Line,” snapped James Taggart. 

469 



There was a long silence. 

The man with the green muffler turned to Dagny. '‘Miss Taggart,” 
he asked sadly and cautiously, “would you say that if — this is just a 
hypothetical question — if the equipment now in use on the Rio Norte 
Line were made available, it would fill the needs of our transconti- 
nental main-line traffic?” 

“It would help.” 

‘The rail of the Rio Norte Line,” said the pallid man with the 
mustache, “is unmatched anywhere in the country and could not 
now be purchased at any price, We have three hundred miles of 
track, which means well over four hundred miles of vail of pure 
Rearden Metal in that Line. Would you say, Miss Taggart, that we 
cannot afford to waste that superlative rail on a branch that carries 
no major traffic any longer 7 ” 

“That is for you to judge.” 

“Let me put it this way: would it be of value if that rail were 
made available for our main-line track, which is m such urgent need 
of repair?” 

“It would help ” 

"Miss Taggart,” asked the man with the quavering voice, “would 
you say that there are any shippers ot consequence let l on the Rio 
Norte Line?” 

“There’s Ted Nielsen of Nielsen Motors. No one else ” 

“Would you say that the operating costs of the Rio Norte Line 
could be used to relieve the financial strain on the rest ol the 
system?” 

“It would help.” 

“Then, as our Operating Vice-President . . ” He stopped: she 
waited, looking at him; lie said, “Well?” 

“What was vour question?” 

“I meant to say . . . that is, well, as our Operating Vice-President, 
don’t you have certain conclusions to draw 7 ” 

She stood up. She looked at the faces around the table, “Gentle- 
men,” she said, “I do not know by what sort of self-fraud you expect 
to feel that if it’s 1 who name the decision you intend to make, it 
will be 1 who’ll bear the responsibility for it. Perhaps you believe 
that if my voice delivers the final blow, it will make me the murdcier 
involved~~since you know r that this is the last act of a long-drawn-out 
murder. I cannot conceive what it is you think you can accomplish by 
a pretense of this kind, and I will not help to stage it The final blow 
will be delivered by you. as were all the others.” 

She turned to go. The chairman half-rose, asking helplessly, “But", 
Miss Taggart —” 

“Please remain seated. Please continue the discussion*- and take 
the vote in which I shall have no voice. 1 shall abstain from voting. 
I’ll stand by, if you wish me to, but only as an employed I will not 
pretend to be anything else.” : 

She turned away once more, but it was the voice of the gray- 
haired man that stopped her. “Miss Taggart, this is notj an official 
question, it is only my personal curiosity, but would you tell me your 
view of the future of the Taggart Transcontinental system?” 

470 



She answered, looking at him in understanding, her voice gentler, 
i have stopped thinking of a future or of a railroad system. 1 intend 
to continue running trains so long as it is still possible to run them, 

I don’t think that it will be much longer.” 

She walked away from the table, to the window, to stand aside 
and let them continue without her. 

She looked at the city. Jim had obtained the permit which allowed 
them the use ot electnc power to the top of the Taggart Building. 
From the height of the room, the city looked like a flattened rem- 
nant, with but a tew rare, lonely streaks of lighted glass still rising 
through the darkness to the sky. 

She did not listen to the voices of the men behind her. She did 
not know for how long the broken snatches of their struggle kept 
rolling past her -the sounds that nudged and prodded one another, 
trying to edge back and leave someone pushed forward— a struggle, 
not to assert one's own will, but to squeeze an assertion from some 
unwilling victim —a battle in which the decision was to be pro- 
nounced, not by the winner, but by the loser: 

*ll seems to me , . . It is, I think ... It must, in rny opinion . , . 

II we were to suppose . . 1 am merely suggesting ... I am not 
implying, but If we consider both sides . . It is, in rny opinion, 
indubitable ... It seems to me to be an unmistakable fact . . 

She did not know whose voice it was, but she heard it when the 
voice pronounced' 

" . . . and, therefore, 1 move that the John Galt Line be closed/" 

Something, she thought, had made him call the Line by its right 
name. 

You had to bear it, too, generations ago -and it was ju*sl as hard 
lot you. just as bad. but you did not let it stop you — was it really as 
bad as this? as ugly 0 -never mind, it's different forms, but it’s only 
pain, and you were not stopped by pain, not by whatever kind it 
was that you had to bear — you were not stopped — you did not give 
in to it— you faced it and this is the kind l have to face— you fought 
and l will have to — you did it— 1 will try . . . She heard, in her own 
mind, the quiet intensity of the words of dedication — and it was some 
time before she realized that she was speaking to Nat Taggart. 

The next voice she heard was Mr Weathcrby’s: “Wait a minute, 
hoys. Do you happen to remember that you need to obtain permis- 
sion before you can close a branch line?” 

‘Good God, Clem!” Taggart's cry was open panic: “Surely there’s 
not going to be any trouble about — ” 

“I wouldn't be too sure of it. Don’t forget that you’re a public 
service and you're expected to provide transportation, whether you 
make money or not.” 

“But you know that it’s impossible!” 

“Well, that's fine for you, that solves your problem, if you close 
that Line — but what will it do to us? Leaving a whole state like 
Colorado practically without transportation— what sort of public sen- 
timent will it arouse? Now, of course, if you gave Wesley something 
m return, to balance it, if you granted the unions' wage raises^-’* 

”1 cAn’t! I gave my word to the National Alliance!” 

471 



“Your word? Well, suit yourself. We wouldn't want to force the 
Alliance. We much prefer to have things happen voluntarily. But 
these are difficult times and it’s hard telling what’s liable to happen. 
With everybody going broke and the tax receipts falling, we might — 
fact being that we hold well over fifty per cent of the Taggart 
bonds — we might he compelled to call for the payment of railroad 
bonds within .six months.” 

"What?r screamed Taggart. 

“ — or sooner.” 

“But you can’t! Oh God. you can’t! It was understood that the 
moratorium was for live years! It was a contract, an obligation! We 
are counting on it!” 

“An obligation? Aren't you old-fashioned, Jim* 7 There aren't any 
obligations, except the necessity of the moment. The original owners 
of those bonds were counting on their payments, too ” 

Dagny burst out laughing. 

She could not stop heiselt, she could not resist it, she could not 
reject a moment’s chance to avenge Ellis Wyatt, Andrew Stockton, 
Lawrence Hammond, all the others She said, torn bv laughter: 

“Thanks, Mr. Weatherby!” 

Mr. Weatherby looked at her in astonishment. “Yes?” he asked 
coldly. 

“I knew that we would have to pay for those bonds one way or 
another. We’re paying.” 

“Miss Taggart,” said the chairman severely, “don't you think that 
Mokl-vou-so’s are futile? do talk of what would have happened il 
we had acted differently is nothing bm purely theoretical speculation. 
We cannot indulge in theory, we have to deal with the practical 
reality of the moment.” 

“Right,” said Mr. Weatherby. ‘That's what you ought to be 
practical Now we offer you a trade. You do something for us and 
we’H do something for you. You give the unions their wage raises 
and we'll give you permission to close fhe Rio Norte Line ” 

“All right.” said James Taggait. his voice choked. 

Standing at the window', she heard them vote on their decision. 
She heard them declare that the John Galt Line would end m six 
weeks, on March 31. 

It's only a matter of getting through the next few moments, she 
thought; take care of the next few moments, and then the next, a 
few at a time, and after a while il will be easier; you’ll gel over it, 
after a while. 

The assignment she gave herself lor the next few moments was to 
put on her coat and be first to leave the room. 

Then there was the assignment of riding in an elevator down the 
great, silent length of the Taggart Building. Then there >was the as- 
signment of crossing the dark lobby. 

Halfway through the lobby, she stopped. A man stpod leaning 
against the wall, in a manner of purposeful waiting — an{l it was she 
who was his purpose, because he was looking straight {at her. She 
did not recognize him at once, because she felt certain that the face 
she saw could not possibly be there in that lobby at thik hour. 

472 



“Hi, Slug,” he said softly. 

She answered, groping for some great distance that had once been 
hers, “Hi, Frisco.” 

“Have they finally murdered John Galt?” 

She struggled to place the moment into some orderly sequence of 
time. The question belonged to the present, but the solemn face 
came from those days on the hill by the Hudson when he would 
have understood all that the question meant to her. 

“How did you know that they'd do it tonight?” she asked. 

it’s been obvious for months that would be the next step at their 
next meeting.” 

“Why did you come here?” 

“To see how you’d take it.” 

“Want to laugh about it?” 

“No, Dagny. I don't want to laugh about it.” 

She saw no hint of amusement m hts face; she answered trustingly, 
“I don’t know how I’m taking it.” 

“1 do.” 

“f was expecting it, J knew they’d have to do it, so now it's only 
a matter ol getting through”- -tonight* she wanted to say, but said — 
“all the work and details.” 

He took her arm. “Let’s go some place where we can have a 
drink together.” 

“Francisco, why don’t you laugh at me? You've always laughed 
about that Line.” 

“1 will —tomorrow, when I see you going on with all the work and 
details. Not tonight.” 

“Why not r ’ 

“Come on. You're in no condition to talk about n.” 

“I -** She wanted to protest, but said, “No, I guess I'm not.” 

fie led her out to the street, and she found herself walking silently 
m time with the .steady rhythm of his steps, the grasp of his fingers 
on her arm unstressed and turn. He signaled a passing taxicab and 
held the door open for her. She obeyed him without questions; but 
Lit relief, like a swimmer who stops struggling. The spectacle of a 
man acting with assurance, was a hie belt thrown to her at a moment 
when she had forgotten the hope ol its existence. The relief was not 
in the surrender of responsibility, but in the sight of a man able to 
assume it. 

“Dagny,” he said, looking at the city as it moved past their taxi 
window, “think of the first man who thought of making a steel girder, 
lie knew what he saw, what he thought and what he wanted. He 
did not say, it seems to me,’ and he did not take orders from those 
who say, in my opinion.’ ” 

She chuckled, wondering at his accuracy: he had guessed the na- 
ture of the sickening sense that held her. the sense of a swamp which 
she had to escape. 

“Look around you.” he said. “A city is the frozen shape of human 
courage — the courage of those men who thought for the first time 
of every bolt, rivet and power generator that went to make it. The 
couragte to say, not it seems to me,’ but A lt is " — and to stake one’s 

473 



life on one's judgment. You're not alone. Those men exist. They 
have always existed. There was a time when human beings crouched 
in caves, at the mercy of any pestilence and any storm. Could men 
such as those on your Hoard of Directors have brought them out of 
the cave and up to this?*' He pointed at the city. 

“God, no!” 

“Then there's your proof that another kind of men does exist.” 

“Yes,” she said avidly. “Yes.” 

“Think of them and forget your Board of Directors.” 

“Francisco, where are they now — the other kind of men?” 

“Now they’re not wanted.” 

“I want them. Oh God. how I want them!” 

“When you do, you’ll find them.” 

He did not question her about the John Galt Line and she did 
not speak of it, until they sat at a table in a dimly lighted booth and 
she saw the stem of a glass between her fingers. She had barely 
noticed how they had come here. It was a quiet, costly place that 
looked like a secret retreat; she saw a small, lustrous table under 
her hand, the leather of a circular seat behind her shoulders, and a 
niche of dark blue mirror that cut them oft from the sight of what- 
ever enjoyment or pain others had come here to hide. Francisco was 
leaning against the tabic, watching her, and she felt as if she were 
leaning against the steady attentiveness of his eyes. 

They did not speak ot the Line, hut she said suddenly, looking 
down at the liquid in her glass: 

“I’m thinking of the night when Nat Taggart was told lhal he 
had to abandon the bridge he was building. The bridge across the 
Mississippi. He had been desperately short of money- -because peo- 
ple were afraid of the bridge, they called it an impractical venture 
That morning, he was told that the river steamboat concerns had 
filed suit against him. demanding that his bridge be destroyed as a 
threat to the public welfare. There were three spans of the bridge 
built, advancing across the river. That same day, a local mob attacked 
the structure and set fire to the wooden scaffolding. His workers 
deserted him, some because they were scared, some because they 
were bribed by the steamboat people, and most of them because he 
had had no money to pay them tor weeks. Throughout (hat day, he 
kept receiving word that men who had subscribed to buy the stock 
of the Taggart Transcontinental Railroad were cancelling their sub- 
scriptions, one after another. Toward evening, a committee, repre- 
senting two banks that were his last hope of support, came to see 
him. It was right there, on the construction site by the fiver, in the 
old railway coach where he lived, with the door open to the view of 
the blackened ruin, with the wooden remnants still smoking over the 
twisted steel. He had negotiated a loan from those banks, but the 
contract had not been signed. The committee told him that he would 
have to give up his bridge, because he was certain to l&se the suit, 
and the bridge would be ordered tom down by the tipie he com- 
pleted it. If he was willing to give it up. they said, and! to ferry his 
passengers across the river on barges, as other raihroadsfwere doing, 
the contract would stand and he would get the money J to continue 

474 



his line west on the other shore; if not, then the loan was oft What 
was his answer? — they asked. He did not say a word, he picked up 
the contract, tore it across, handed it to them and walked out. He 
walked to the bridge, along the spans, down to the last girder. He 
knelt, he picked up the tools his men had left and he started to clear 
the charred wreckage away from the steel structure. His chief engi- 
neer saw him there, axe in hand, alone over the wide river, with the 
sun setting behind him in the west where his line was to go. He 
woiked there all night. By morning, he had thought out a plan of 
what he would do to find the right men, the men of independent 
judgment — to find them, to convince them, to raise the money, to 
continue the bridge.’’ 

She spoke in a low, fiat voice, looking down at the spot of light 
that shimmered in the liquid as her fingers turned the stem of her 
glass once in a while. She showed no emotion, but her voice had the 
intense monotone of a prayer: 

‘Francisco ... if he could live through that night, what right have 
I to complain? What does it matter, how l feel just now? He built 
that bridge. 1 have to hold it foi him. 1 can't let it go the way of the 
bridge of the Atlantic Southern. 1 feel almost as if he’d know it, if 
l let that happen, he'd know it that night when he was alone over 
the river . . . no. that’s nonsense, but here's what 1 feel: any man 
who knows what Nat Taggart fell that night, any man living now 
and capable of knowing it — it’s him that 1 would betray if 1 let it 
happen . . . and I can’t." 

“Dagnv, if Nat Taggait were living now, what would he do?" 

She answered involuntarily, with a swift, bitter chuckle, "He 
wouldn't last a minute!"— then corrected herself: "No, he would. He 
would find a way to fight them " 

‘‘How?’' 

“1 don’t know." 

She noticed some tense, cautious quality in the attentive way he 
watched her as he leaned forward and asked, "Dagny. the men of 
\our Board of Directors are no match for Nat Taggart, are they? 
There's no form of contest in which they could beat him, there's 
nothing he'd have to tear from them, there’s no mind, no will, no 
power in the bunch of them to equal one- thousandth of his " 

’No, ot course not." 

’ I hen why is it that throughout man's history the Nat Taggarts, 
who make the world, have always won — and always lost it to the 
men ol the Board?" 

1 . . don't know." 

“How could men who re afraid to hold an unqualified opinion 
about the weather, fight Nat Taggart? How could they seize his 
achievement, if he chose to defend it? Dagny, he fought with every 
weapon he possessed, except the most important one. They could 
not have won, if we — he and the rest of us— had not given the world 
■way to them." 

/‘Yes. You gave it away to them. Ellis Wyatt did. Ken Danagger 
did. I won't," 

He smiled. "Who built the John Galt Line for them?" 

475 



He saw only the faintest contraction of her mouth, but he knew 
that the question was like a blow across an open wound. Yet she 
answered quietly, “1 did.” 

"For this kind of end?” 

“For the men who did not hold out, would not light and gave up.” 

“Don’t you see that no other end was possible?” 

“No,” 

“How much injustice are you wilting to take?” 

“As much as Tm able to fight.” 

“What will you do now? Tomorrow?” 

She said calmly, looking straight at him with the faintly proud look 
of stressing her calm. “Start to tear it up.” 

“What?” 

“The John Galt Line. Start to tear it up as good as with my own 
hands with my own mind, by my own instructions. Get it ready to 
be dosed, then tear it up and use its pieces to teinforce the transcon- 
tinental track. There's a lot of work to do. It will keep me busy.” 
The calm cracked a little, in the faintest change of her voice: “You 
know, Tin looking forward to it. I'm glad that Til have It) do it 
myself. That's why Nat Taggart worked all that night just to Keep 
going. It’s not so bad as long as there's something one can do. And 
I’ll know, at least, that I'm saving the main line.” 

“Dagny,” he asked very quietly — and she wondered what made 
her feel that he looked as if his personal fate hung on her answer, 
“what if it were the main line that you had to dismember?” 

She answered irresistibly. “Then I’d let the fast engine run over 
me!” — but added, “No. That's just self-pity 1 wouldn't.” 

He said gently. “I know you wouldn't. But you’d wish you could.' 

“Yes.” 

He smiled, not looking at her; it was a mocking smile, but it was 
a smile of pain and the mockery was directed at himself. She won- 
dered what made her certain of it; but she knew his face so well that 
she would always know what he felt, even though she could not guess 
his reasons any longer. She knew his face as well, she thought, as she 
knew every line of his body, as she could still see it, as she was suddenly 
aware of it under his clothes, a few feet away, in the crowding intimacy 
of the booth. He turned to i<x>k at her and some sudden change in his 
eyes made her certain that he knew what she was thinking. He looked 
away and picked up his glass. 

“Well — ” he said, “to Nat Taggart.” 

“And to Sebastian d’Anconia?” she asked— -then regretted it, be 
cause it had sounded like mockery, which she had not intended. 

But she saw a look of odd, bright clarity in his eyes and he an- 
swered firmly, with the faintly proud smile of stressing? his firmnes>. 
“Yes — and to Sebastian d’Anconia.” 

Her hand trembled a little and she spilled a few drops bn the square 
of paper lace that lay on the dark, shining plastic of tpe table. She 
watched him empty his glass in a single gesture; the brusque, brief 
movement of his hand made it look like the gesture jof some sob 
emu pledge. 


476 



She thought suddenly that this was the first time in twelve years 
that he had come to her of his own choice. 

He had acted as if he were confidently in control, as if his confi- 
dence were a transfusion to let her recapture hers, heJiad given her 
no time to wonder that they should be here together. Now she felt, 
unaccountably, that the reins he had held were gone. It was only the 
silence of a few blank moments and the motionless outline of his 
forehead, cheekbone and mouth, as he sat with his face turned away 
from her— but she felt as if it were he who was now struggling for 
something he had to recapture. 

She wondered what had been his purpose tonight— and noticed 
that he had, perhaps, accomplished it: he had carried her over the 
worst moment, he had given her an invaluable defense against de- 
spair— the knowledge that a living intelligence had heard her and 
understood. But why had he wanted to do it? Why had he cared 
about her hour of despair — after the years of agony he had given 
her? Why had it mattered to him how she would take the death of 
the John Galt Lane? She noticed that this was the question she had 
not asked him in the lobby of the Taggart Building. 

This was the bond between them, she thought: that she would 
never be astonished if he came when she needed him most, and that 
he would always know when to come. This was the danger: that she 
would trust him, even while knowing that it could be nothing but 
some new kind of trap, even while remembering that he would al- 
ways betray those who trusted him. 

He sal. leaning forward with his arms crossed on the table, looking 
straight ahead. He said suddenly, not turning to her: 

“I am thinking ot the fifteen years that Sehasti&n d'Anconia had 
to wait for the woman he loved: He did not know whether he would 
ever find her again, whether she would survive . . . whether she 
would wait for him. But he knew that she could not live through his 
battle and that he could not call her to him until it was won. So he 
waited, holding his love in the place of the hope which he had no 
right to hold. But when he carried her across the threshold of his 
house, as the first Sefiora d’Anconia of a new world, he knew that 
the battle was won, that they were free, that nothing threatened her 
and nothing would ever hurt her again/" 

In the days of their passionate happiness, he had never given her 
a hint that he would come to think of her as Sefiora d’Anconia. For 
one moment, she wondered whether she had known what she had 
meant to him. But the moment ended in an invisible shudder: she 
would not believe that the past twelve years could allow the things 
she was hearing to be possible. This w as the new trap, she thought. 

Francisco/’ she asked, her voice hard, “what have you done to 
Hank Reardcn?” 

He looked startled that she should think of that name at that 
moment, “Why?” he asked. 

“He told me once that you were the only man he’d ever liked. 
But last time 1 saw him, he said he would kill you on sight/’ 

“He did not tell you why?" 

“No.” 


477 



'‘He told you nothing about it?’' 

“No." She saw him smiling strangely, a smile of sadness, gratitude 
and longing. “I warned him that you would hurt him — when he told 
me that you were the only man he liked." 

His words came like a sudden explosion: “He was the only man — 
with one exception — to whom l could have given my life!" 

“Who is the exception?" 

“The man to whom l have." 

“What do you mean?" 

He shook his head, as if he had said more than he intended, and 
did not answer. 

“What did you do to Rearden?" 

“Ill tell you some time. Not now." 

“Is that what you always do to those who , . . mean a great deal 
to you?" 

He looked at her with a smile that had the luminous sincerity of 
innocence and pam. “You know," he said gently, “I could say that 
that is what they always do to me." He added, “Rut I won’t. The 
actions — and the knowledge — were mine." 

He stood up. “Shall we go? HI take you home." 

She rose and he held her coat for her: it was a wide, loose gaimcnt, 
and his hands guided it to enfold her body. She felt his arm remain 
about her shoulders a moment longer than he intended hot to notice 

She glanced back at him. But he was standing oddly still, staring 
intently down at the table. In rising, they had brushed aside the mats 
of paper lace and she saw' an inscription cut into the plastic ol the 
table top. Attempts had been made to erase it, but the inscription 
remained, as the graven voice of some unknown dtunk's despair' 
“Who is John Galt?" 

With a brusque movement of anger, she flicked the mat back to 
cover the words He chuckled 

“l can answer it," he said. “1 can tell you who is John Galt." 

“Really? Everybody seems to know him, but they never tell the 
same story twice." 

“They’re all true, though — all the stones you’ve heard about him." 

“Well, what’s yours? Who is he?" 

“John Galt is Prometheus who changed his mind After centuries 
of being torn by vultures in payment for having brought to men the 
fire of the gods, he broke his chains- -and he withdrew his lire — until 
the day when men withdraw their vultures." 

* * 

The band of crossties swept in wide curves around gianite corners, 
dinging to the mountainsides of Colorado. Dagny walked down the 
ties, keeping her hands in her coal pockets, and her eyes on the 
meaningless distance ahead; only the familiar movement ol straining 
her steps to the spacing of the ties gave her the physical sense of an 
action pertaining to a railroad, 

A gray cotton, which was neither quite fog nor ck^uus, hung in 
sloppy wads between sky and mountains, making the %ky look like 
an old mattress spilling its stuffing down the sides of jthe peaks. A 
crusted snow covered the ground, belonging neither to winter nor to 

47 H 



spring. A net of moisture hung in the air, and she felt an icy pinprick 
on her face once in a while, which was neither a raindrop nor a 
snowflake. The weather seemed afraid to take a stand and clung 
noncommittally to some sort of road’s middle; Board of Directors’ 
weather, she thought. The light seemed drained and she could not 
tell whether this was the afternoon or the evening of March 31 . But 
she was very certain that it was March 31; that was a certainty not 
to be escaped 

She had come to Colorado with Hank Rearden, to buy whatever 
machinery could still be found in the dosed factories. It had been 
like a hurried search through the sinking hulk of a great ship before 
it was to vanish out of reach. They could have given the task to 
employees, but they had come, both prompted by the same uncon* 
fessed motive: they could not resist the desire to attend the run of 
the last train, as one cannot resist the desire to give the last salute 
by attending a funeral, even while knowing that it is only an act of 
self-torture. 

They had been buying machinery from doubtful owners in sales 
of dubious legality, since nobody could tell who had the right to 
dispose of the great, dead properties, and nobody would come to 
challenge the transactions. They had bought everything that could 
be moved from the gutted plant of Nielsen Motors. Ted Nielsen had 
quit and vanished, a week after the announcement that the Line was 
to be closed. 

She had felt like a scavenger, but the activity ot the hunt had 
made her able to bear these past few days. When she had found 
that three empty hours remained before the departure of the last 
train, she had gone to walk through the countryside, to escape, the 
stillness ol the town She had walked at random through twisting 
mountain trails, alone among rocks and snow, trying to substitute 
motion lor thought, knowing that she had to get through this day 
without thinking ot the summer when she had ridden the engine of 
the first train. But she found herself walking back along the roadbed 
of the John Galt Line — and she knew that she had intended it, that 
she had gone out foi that purpose. 

It was a spur track which had already been dismembered. There 
were no signal lights, no switches, no telephone wires, nothing but 
a long band of wooden strips on the ground— a chain of ties without 
rail, like the remnant of a spine —and, as its lonely guardian, at an 
abandoned grade crossing, a pole with slanted arms saying; “Stop. 
Look Listen.” 

An early darkness mixed with fog was slipping down to fill the 
\ alleys, when she came upon the factory. There was an inscription 
high on the lustrous tile ot its fiont wall: ‘ Roger Marsh. Electrical 
Appliances." T he man who had wanted to chain himself to his desk 
in order not to leave this, she thought. The building stood intact, 
hke a corpse in that instant when its eyes have just closed arul one 
Mill waits to see them open again. She felt that the lights would flare 
up at any moment behind the great sheets of windows, under the 
long, flat roofs. Then she saw one broken pane, pierced by a stone 
for some young moron’s enjoyment — and she saw the tall, dry stem 

479 



of a single weed rising from the steps of the main entrance. Hit by a 
sadden, blinding hatred, in rebellion against the weed’s impertinence, 
knowing of what enemy this was the scout, she ran forward, she fell 
on her knees and jerked the weed up by its roots. Then, kneeling 
on the steps of a dosed factory, looking at the vast silence of moun- 
tains, brush and dusk, she thought: What do you think you're doing? 

It was almost dark when she reached the end of the ties that led 
her back to the town of Marshville. Marshville had been the end 
of the Line for months past; service to Wvatt Junction had been 
discontinued long ago; Dr. Ferris' Reclamation Project had been 
abandoned this winter. 

The street lights were on, and they hung in mid-air at the intersec- 
tions, in a long, diminishing line of yellow globes over the empty 
streets of Marshville. All the better homes were closed — the neat. 
Sturdy houses of modest cost, well built and well kept; there were 
faded “For Sale” signs on their lawns. But she saw lights in the 
windows of the cheap, garish structures that had acquired, within a 
few years, the slovenly dilapidation of slum hovels; the homes of 
people who had not moved, the people who never looked beyond 
the span of one week. She saw a large new television set in the 
lighted room of a house with a sagging roof and cracking walls. She 
wondered how long they expected the electric power companies of 
Colorado to remain in existence. Then she shook her head: those 
people had never known that power companies existed. 

The main street of Marshville was lined by the black windows of 
shops out of business. Alt the luxury stores are gone —she thought, 
looking at their signs; and then she shuddered, realizing what things 
she now called luxury, realizing to what extent and in what manner 
those things, once available to the poorest, had been luxuries: Dry 
Cleaning — Electrical Appliances— Gas Station— Drug Store -Five 
and Ten. The only ones left open were grocery stores and saloons. 

The platform of the railroad station was crowded. The glaring arc 
lights seemed to pick it out of the mountains, to isolate and focus 
it, like a small stage on which every movement was naked to the 
sight of the unseen tiers rising in the vast, encircling night. People 
were carting luggage, bundling their children, haggling at ticket win- 
dows, the stilled panic of their manner suggesting that what they 
really wanted to do was to fall down on the ground and scream with 
terror. Their terror had the evasive quality of guilt: it was not the tear 
that comes from understanding, but from the refusal to understand. 

The last train stood at the platform, its windows a long, lone streak 
of light. The steam of the locomotive, gasping tensely through the 
wheels, did not have its usual joyous sound of energy released lor a 
sprint; it had the sound of a panting breath that one dreads to hear 
and dreads more lo stop hearing. Far at the end of the lighted win- 
dows, she saw the small red dot ot a lantern attached to h$r private 
car. Beyond the lantern, there was nothing but a black void. 

The train was loaded to capacity, and the shrill notes of hysteria 
in the confusion of voices were the pleas for space in vestibules and 
aisles. Some people were not leaving, but stood in vapid icuriosity. 
watching the show; they had come, as if knowing that tb& was the 

480 



last event they would ever witness in their community and, perhaps, 
in their lives. 

She walked hastily through the crowd, trying not to look at any- 
one. Some knew who she was, most of them did not. She saw an 
old woman with a ragged shawl on her shoulders and the graph of 
a lifetime’s struggle on the cracked skin of her face; the woman’s 
glance was a hopeless appeal foe help. An unshaved young man with 
gold-rimmed glasses stood on a crate under an arc light, yelling to 
the faces shifting past him, “What do they mean, no business! Look 
at that train! It’s full of passengers! There’s plenty of business! it’s 
just that there’s no profits for them— -that's why they’re letting you 
perish, those greedy parasites!” A disheveled woman rushed up to 
Dagny, waving two tickets and screaming something about the wrong 
date. Dagny found herself pushing people out of the way, fighting 
to reach the end of the train — but an emaciated man, with the staring 
eyes of years of malicious futility, rushed at her, shouting, “It’s all 
right for you, you’ve got a g(x)d overcoat and a private car, but you 
won’t give us any trains, you and all the selfish He stopped 
abruptly, looking at someone behind her. She felt a hand grasping 
her elbow: it was Hank Rcatdcn. He held her arm and led her 
toward her car: seeing the look on his face, she understood why 
people got out of their way. At the end of the platform, a pallid, 
plum pish man stood saying to a crying woman, “That’s how it’s 
always been in this world. There will be no chance for the poor, 
until the rich are destroyed.” High above the town, hanging in black 
space like an uncooled planet, the flame of Wyatt’s Torch was twist- 
ing iri the wind. 

Rcardcn went inside her car, but she remained on the steps of the 
vestibule, delaying the finality of turning away. She heard the “All 
aboard!" She looked at the people who remained on the platform 
as one looks at those who watch the departure of the last lifeboat. 

The conductor stood below, at the loot of the steps, with his lan- 
tern in one hand and his watch in the other. He glanced at the watch, 
then glanced up at her face. She answered by the silent affirmation 
of closing her eyes and inclining her head. She saw his lantern cir- 
cling through the air, as she turned away— and the first jolt of the 
wheels, on the rails of Rearden Metal, was made easier for her by 
the sight of Rearden. as she pulled the door open and went into 
her car 

* *■ 

When lames Taggart telephoned l Jllian Rearden from New York 
and said, “Why, no — no special reason, just wondered how you were 
and whether you ever came to the city — haven't seen you for ages and 
just thought we might have lunch together next time you’re in New 
York"— she knew that he had some very special reason in mind. 

When she answered lazily, “Oh, let me sec — what day is this? 
April second? — lei me look at my calendar — why, it just so happens 
that, I have some shopping to do in New York tomorrow, so I’ll be 
delighted to let you save me my lunch money”— he knew that she 
had no , shopping to do and that the luncheon would be the only 
purpose of her trip to the city, 


481 



They met in a distinguished, high-priced restaurant, much too dis- 
tinguished and high-priced ever to be mentioned in the gossip col- 
umns; not the kind of place which James Taggart, always eager for 
personal publicity, was in the habit of patronizing; he did not want 
them to bo seen together, she concluded. 

The half-hint of half-secret amusement remained on her face while 
she listened to him talking about their friends, the theater and the 
weather, carefully building for himself the protection of the unim- 
portant. She sat gracetully not quite straight, as if she were leaning 
back, enjoying the futility of his performance and the fact that he 
had to stage it for her benefit. She waited with patient curiosity to 
discover his purpose, 

“1 do think that you deserve a pat on the back or a medal or 
something. Jim.’' she said. “for being remarkably cheerful in spite 
of all the messy trouble you’re having. Didn't you just close the best 
branch of your railroad‘d’ 

“Oh. it's only a slight financial setback, nothing more. One has to 
expect retrenchments at a time like this. Considering the general 
stale of the country, we're doing quite well. Beltei than the rest of 
them." He added, shrugging, “Besides, it’s a matter of opinion 
whether the Rio Norte Line was our best branch. It is only my sister 
who thought so. It was her pet project.” 

She caught the tone of pleasure blurring the drawl ot his syllables. 
She smiled and said, “l see." 

Looking up at her from under his lowered forehead, as if stressing 
that he expected her to understand, Taggart asked. “How is he tak- 
ing it?" 

“Who?” She understood quite well. 

“Your husband." 

“Taking what?" 

“The closing of that Line." 

She smiled gaily. “Your guess is as good as mine, Jim - and mine 
is very good indeed/' 

“What do you mean?" 

“You know how he would take it just as you know how your sistei 
is taking it. So your cloud has a double silver lining, hasn't it?” 

“What had he been saying in the last few days?" 

“He's been away m Colorado for over a week, so I — " She 
stopped; she had started answering lightly, but she noticed that \ ag~ 
gart's question had been too specific while his tone had been too 
casual, and she realized that he had struck the first note leading 
toward the purpose of the luncheon, she paused lor the briefest 
instant, then finished, still more lightly, “so I wouldn't know. But 
he’s coming back any day now." 

“Would you say that his attitude is still what one '(might call 
recalcitrant?" 

“Why, Jim, that would be an understatement!" r 

“It was to be hoped that events had, perhaps, taugfit him the 
wisdom of a mellower approach." r 

It amused her to keep him in doubt about her understanding. “Oh 

482 



yes,” she said innocently, “it would be wonderful if anything could 
ever make him change.” 

“He is making things exceedingly hard for himself-” 

“He always has.” 

“But events have a way of beating us all into a more . . . pliable 
frame of mind, sooner or later.” 

“I’ve heard many characteristics ascribed to him, but ‘pliable' has 
never been one of them. 5 ’ 

“Well, things change and people change with them. After all, it is 
a law of nature that animals must adapt themselves to their back- 
ground. And I might add that adaptability is the one characteristic 
most stringently required at present by laws other than those of 
nature. We’re in for a very difficult time, and 1 would hale to see 
you suffer the consequences of his intransigent attitude. I would 
hate — as your friend — to see you in the kind of danger he’s headed 
lor, unless he learns to cooperate.” 

“How sweet of you, Jim,” she said sweetly. 

He was doling his sentences out with cautious slowness, balancing 
himself between word and intonation to hit the- right degree of semi- 
clarity. He wanted her to understand, but he did not want her to 
understand fully, explicitly, down to the root — since the essence of 
that modern language, which he had learned to speak expertly, was 
never to let oneself or others understand anything down to the root. 

He had not needed many words to understand Mr. Weatherby. 
On his last trip to Washington, he had pleaded with Mr. Weatherby 
that a cut in the rates of the railroads would be a deathblow; the 
wage raises had been granted, but the demands for the cut in rates 
were still heard in the press- -and Taggart had known what it meant, 
it Mr. Mouch still permitted them to be heard; he had known that 
the knife was still poised at his throat. Mr. Weatherby had not an- 
swered his pleas, but had said, in a tone of idly irrelevant speculation, 
“Wesley has so many tough problems. If he is to give everybody a 
breathing spell, financially speaking, he’s got to put into operation a 
certain emergency program of which you have some inkling. But you 
know what hell the unprogressive elements of the country would 
i, use about it. A man like Reardon, for instance. We don’t want any 
more stunts of the sort he’s liable to pull. Wesley would give a lot 
tor somebody who could keep Reardon in line. But I guess that’s 
something nobody can deliver. 'Hiough I may be wrong You may 
know better, Jim, since Rearden is a sort of friend of yours, who 
comes to your parties and all that.” 

Looking at Ullian across the tabic, Taggart said, “Friendship, 1 
lind, is the most valuable thing in life — and i would be amiss if I 
didn't give you proof of mine.” 

" But I've never doubted it.” 

He lowered his voice to the tone of an ominous warning: “I think 
i I should tell you, as a favor, to a friend, although it’s confidential, 
I that your husband’s attitude is being discussed in high places — very 
1 high places. I’m sure you know what l mean.” 

This was why he hated Lillian Rearden, thought Taggart: she knew 
Ihe game, but she played it with unexpected variations of her own. 

483 



it was against all rules to look at him suddenly, to laugh in his face, 
and — after all those remarks showing that she understood too little — 
to say bluntly, showing that she understood too much. “Why, darling, 
of course l know what you mean. You mean that the purpose of 
this very excellent luncheon was not a favor you wanted to do me, 
but a favor you wanted to get from me. You mean that it’s you who 
are in danger and could use that favor to great advantage for a trade 
in high places. And you mean that you are reminding me of my 
promise to deliver the goods/' 

“The sort of performance he put on at his trial was hardly what 
I'd call delivering the goods/' he said angrily. “It wasn't what you 
had led me to expect/' 

“Oh my. no, it wasn’t," she said placidly. “It certainly wasn't. But, 
darling, did you expect me not to know that after that performance 
of his he wouldn't be very popular in high places? Did you really 
think you had to tell me that as a confidential favor?" 

“But it's true. I heard him discussed, so l thought I'd tell you." 

“I'm sure it’s true. I know that they would be discussing him. I 
know also that if there were anything they could do to him, they 
would have done it right after his trial. My, would they have been 
glad to do it! So l know that he’s the only one among you who is 
in no danger whatever, at the moment I know that it's they who 
are afraid of him. Do you see how well l understand what you 
mean, darling?" 

“Well, if you think you do, I must say that for my part I don’t 
understand you at all. I don’t know what it is you're doing." 

“Why, I'm just setting things straight-* so that you’ll know that 1 
know how much you need me. And now that it's straight. I’ll tell 
you the truth in my turn: I didn’t double-cross you, 1 merely failed. 
His performance at the trial — 1 didn’t expect it any more than you 
did. Less. I had good reason not to expect it. But something went 
wrong. I don’t know what it was. I am trying to find out. When I 
do, I will Tceep my promise. Then you'll be free to take full credit 
for it and to tell your friends in high places that it's you who’ve 
disarmed him." 

“Lillian/' he said nervously, “l meant it when I said that 1 was 
anxious to give you proof of my friendship — so »f thcie’s anything I 
can do for** " 

She laughed. “There isn’t. I know you mean it. But there's nothing 
you can do for me. No favor of any kind. No trade. I'm a truly non- 
commercial person, I want nothing in return, lough luck, Jim. You'll 
just have to remain at my mercy." 

“But then why should you want to do it at all? What are you 
getting out of it?" 

She leaned back, smiling. “This lunch. Just seeing y^u here. Just 
knowing that you had to come to me." 

An angry spark flashed in Taggart’s veiled eyes, the|i his eyelids 
narrowed slowly and he, too, leaned back in his chairf his face re- 
laxing to a faint look of mockery and satisfaction. Eveit from within 
that unstated, unnamed, undefined muck which represented his code 

484 



of values, he was able to realize which one of them was the more 
dependent on the other and the more contemptible. 

When they parted at the door of the restaurant, she went to Rear* 
den's suite at the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, where she stayed occasion- 
ally in his absence. She paced the room for about half an hour* in 
a leisurely manner of reflection. Then she picked up the telephone, 
with a smoothly casual gesture, but with the purposeful air of a 
decision reached. She called Rearden’s office at the mills and asked 
Miss Ives when she expected him to return. 

“Mr. Rearden will be in New York tomorrow, arriving on the 
Comet, Mrs, Rearden,” said Miss Ives’ clear, courteous voice. 

“Tomorrow? That's wonderful. Miss Ives, would you do me a 
favor? Would you call Gertrude at the house and tell her not to 
expect me for dinner? I’m staying in New York overnight.” 

She hung up, glanced at her watch and called the florist of the 
Wayne-Falkland. “This is Mrs. Henry Rearden,” she said. “1 should 
like to have two dozen Rises delivered to Mr. Rearden’s drawing 
room aboard the Comet. . . . Yes, today, this afternoon, when the 
Cornel reaches Chicago. . . . No, without any card — just the 
flowers. . . . Thank you ever so much.” 

She telephoned James Taggart. “Jim. will you send me a pass 
to your passenger platforms? I want to meet my husband at the 
station tomorrow ” 

She hesitated between Balph Eubank and Bertram Scudder, chose 
Balph Eubank, telephoned him and made a date for this evening’s 
dinner and a musical show. Then she went to take a bath, and lay 
relaxing in a tub of warm water, reading a magazine devoted to 
problems of political economy. 

It was late afternoon when the florist telephoned her. “Our Chi- 
cago office sent word that they were unable to deliver the flowers, 
Mrs. Rearden,” he said, “because Mr. Rearden is not aboard the 
Comet.” 

“Are you sure?” she asked. 

“Quite sure, Mrs. Rearden. Our man found at the station in Chi- 
cago that there was no compartment on the train reserved in Mr. 
Rearden's name. We checked with the New York office of Taggart 
Transcontinental, just to make certain, and were told that Mr. Rear- 
den's name is not on the passenger list of the Comet.” 

“I see. . . . Then cancel the order, please. . . . Thank you.” 

She sat by the telephone for a moment, frowning, then called Miss 
Ives. “Please forgive me for being slightly scatterbrained. Miss Ives, 
but 1 was rushed and did not write it down, and now I’m not quite 
certain ot what you said. Did you say that Mr, Rearden was aiming 
back tomorrow? On the Comet?” 

“Yes, Mrs. Rearden.” 

“You have not heard of any delay or change in his plans?” 

“Why, no. In fact. 1 spoke to Mr. Rearden about an hour ago. He 
telephoned from the station in Chicago, and he mentioned that he 
had to hurry back aboard, as the Comet was about to leave.” 

“f see. Thank you.” 

She leaped to her feet as soon as the click of the instrument re- 

485 



stored her to privacy. She started pacing the room, her steps now 
unrhythm ieally tense. Then she stopped, struck by a sudden thought. 
There was only one reason why a man would make a train reserva- 
tion under an assumed name: if he was not traveling alone. 

Her facial muscles went flowing slowly into a smile of satisfaction: 
this was an opportunity she had not expected. 

* * 

Standing on the Terminal platform, at a point halfway down the 
length of the train, Lillian Rearden watched (he passengers descend- 
ing from the Comet. Her mouth held the hint of a smile: there was 
a spark of animation in her lifeless eyes; she glanced from one face 
to another, jerking her head with the awkward eagerness of a school- 
girl. She was anticipating the look on Rearden’s face when, with his 
mistress beside him, he would see her standing there. 

Her glance darted hopefully to every flashy young female stepping 
off the train. It was hard to watch: within an instant after the first 
few figures, the tram had seemed to burst at the seams, flooding the 
platform with a solid current that swept in one direction, as if pulled 
by a vacuum; she could barely distinguish separate persons. The 
lights were more glare than illumination, picking this one strip out 
of a dusty, oily darkness. She needed an eftoit to stand still against 
the invisible pressure of motion. 

Her first sight of Rearden in the crowd came as a shock* she had 
not seen him step out of a car, but there he was. walking in her 
direction lrom somewhere far down the length ol the train. He was 
alone. He was walking with his usual puiposetul speed, his hands in 
the pockets of his trencheoat. I here was no woman beside him. no 
companion of any kind, except a porter hurrying along with a bag 
she recognized as his. 

in a fury of incredulous disappointment, she looked frantically for 
an> single feminine figure he could have left behind. She felt certain 
that she would recognize his choice. She saw none that could be 
possible. And then she saw that the last car of the train was a private 
car, and that 'the figure standing at us door, talking to some station 
official — a figure wearing, not minks and veils, but a rough sports 
coat that stressed the incomparable grace ol a slender body m the 
confident posture of this station's owner and center — was Dagny 
Taggart. Then Lillian Rearden understood. 

“Lillian! What's the matter?’' 

She heard Rearden’s voice, she felt his hand grasping her arm; she 
saw him looking at her as one looks at the object of a sudden emer- 
gency. He was looking at a blank face and an unfocused glance 
of terror. 

“What happened? What are you doing here?” 

“I . . . Hello, Henry ... I just came to meet you . . . Np special 
reason ... I just wanted to meet you.” The terror was gepte from 
her face, but she spoke in a strange, flat voice. “1 wantejd to sec 
you, it was an impulse, a sudden impulse and I couldn’t iTesist it, 
because — 

“But you look . . . looked ill.” 

“No . . . No, maybe I felt faint, it’s stuffy here. . . . f couldn’t 

486 



resist coming, because it made me think of the days when you would 
have been glad to see me ... it was a moment’s illusion to re-create 
for myself. . . .” The words sounded like a memorized lesson. 

She knew that she had to speak, while her mind was fighting to 
grasp the full meaning of her discovery. r rhe words were pari of the 
plan she had intended to use, if she had met him after he had found 
the roses in his compartment. 

He did not answer, he stood watching her, frowning. 

“1 missed you, Henry. I know what 1 am confessing: But I don’t 
expect it to mean anything to you any longer.” The words did not 
fit the tight face, the lips that moved with effort, the eyes that kept 
glancing away from him down the length of the platform. *T 
wanted ... I merely wanted to surprise you.” A look of shrewdness 
and purpose was returning to her face. 

He took her arm, but she drew back, a little too sharply. 

“Aren't you going to say a word to me, Henry?” 

‘‘What do you wish me to say?” 

“Do you hate it as much as that — having your wife come to meet 
you at the station?” She glanced down the platform: Dagny Taggart 
was walking toward them; he did not see her. 

“Let's go,” he said. 

She would not move. “Do you?” she asked. 

“What?” 

“Do you hate it 7 ” 

“No, I don't hate it. I merely don't understand it.” 

“Tell me about your trip. I'm sure you've had a very enjoyable 
trip ” 

“Come on We can talk at home.” 

“When do 1 ever have a chance to talk to you at home?” She was 
drawling her words impassively, as if she were stretching them to fill 
time, for some reason which lie could not imagine. “I had hoped to 
catch a few moments of your attention- -like this — between trains 
and business appointments and all those important matters that hold 
you day and night, all those great achievements of yours, such as . . . 
Hello, Miss Taggart!” she said sharply, her voice loud and bright. 

Reardon whirled around. Dagny was walking past them, but she 
^topped. 

“How do you do,” she said to Lillian, bowing, her face express- 
ionless. 

“1 am so sorry. Miss Taggart,” said Lillian, smiling, “you must 
forgive me if I don’t know the appropriate formula of condolences 
for the occasion.” She noted that Dagny and Rearden had not 
greeted each other. “You’re returning from what was, in effect, the 
funeral of your child by my husband, aren't you?” 

Dagny’s mouth showed a faint line of astonishment and of con- 
tempt. She inclined hei head, by way of leave-taking, and walked on. 

Lillian glanced sharply at Rcarden’s face, as if in deliberate em- 
phasis. He looked at her indifferently, puz/led. 

She said nothing. She followed him without a word when he turned 
to go. ‘She remained silent in the taxicab, her face half-turned away 
horn him, while they rode to the Wayne-Faikland Hotel. He felt 

487 



certain, as he looked at the tautly twisted set of her mouth, that 
some uncustomary violence was racing within her. He had never 
known her to experience a strong emotion of any kind. 

She whirled to face him, the moment they were alone in his room. 

“So that's who it is?” she asked. 

He had not expected it. He looked at her, not quite believing that 
he had understood it correctly. 

“It’s Dagny Taggart who's your mistress, isn't she?*' 

He did not answer. 

“1 happen to know that you had no compartment on that train. 
So I know where you’ve slept for the last four nights. Do you want 
to admit it or do you want me to send detectives to question her 
train crews and her house servants? Is it Dagny Taggart?" 

“Yes.” he answered calmly. 

Her mouth twisted into an ugly chuckle: she was staring past him. 
“I should have known it. I should have guessed. That’s why it 
didn't work!” 

He asked, in blank bewilderment, “What didn't work?” 

She stepped back, as il to remind hcrselt of his presence. “Had 
you — when she was in our house, at the party — had you. then . . . 7” 

“No. Since.” 

“The great businesswoman," she said, “above reproach and femi- 
nine weaknesses. The great mind detached from any concern with 
the body . . She chuckled “The bracelet . . she said, with the 
still look that made it sound as it the words were dropped acciden- 
tally out of the torrent in her mind. “That's what she meant to you. 
That’s the weapon she gave you." 

“If you really understand what you’re saying - yes.” 

“Do you think I’ll let you get away with it?” 

“Get away . . *>” He vas looking at her incredulously, in cold, 
astonished curiosity.” 

“That’s w'hy, at your trial — ” She stopped 

“What about my trial?” 

She was trembling. “You know, of course, that 1 won’t allow this 
to continue ” 

“What does it have to do with my trial?" 

“I won’t permit you to have her Not her. Anyone but her,” 

He let a moment pass, then asked evenly. “Why?” 

“I won’t permit it! You’ll give it up!” He was looking at her 
without expression, but the steadiness of his eyes hit her as his most 
dangerous answer. “You’ll give it up, you'll leave her, you'll never 
see her again!” 

“Lillian, if you wish to discuss it. there’s one thing you’d better 
understand: nothing on earth will make me give it up.” 

“But I demand it!” 

“I told you that you could demand anything but that.” , 

He saw the look of a peculiar panic growing in her cy£s: it was 
not the look of understanding, but of a ferocious refusal Jo under- 
stand — as if she wanted to turn the violence of her emotion into a 
fog screen, as if she hoped, not that it would blind her (jo reality, 
but that her blindness would make reality cease to exist. 

488 



“Bui I have the right to demand it! 1 own your life! It’s my prop- 
erty. My property — by your own oath. You swore to serve my happi- 
ness. Not yours — mine! What have you done for me? You’ve given 
me nothing, you've sacrificed nothing, you've never been concerned 
with anything but yourself — your work, your mills, your talent, your 
mistress! What about me? f hold first claim! I’m presenting it tor 
collection! You're the account I own!” 

It was the look on his face that drove her up the rising steps of 
her voice, scream by scream, into terror. vShe was seeing, not anger 
or pain or guilt, but the one inviolate enemy: indifference. 

“Have you thought of me?” she screamed, her voice breaking 
against his face. “Have you thought of what you're doing to me? 
You have no right to go on, if you know that you’re putting me 
through hell every time you sleep with that woman! I can't stand it, 

I can't stand one moment of knowing it! Will you sacrifice me to 
your animal desire? Are you as vicious and selfish as that? Can you 
buy your pleasure at the price of my suffering? (’an you have it, if 
this is what it does to me?” 

Feeling nothing but the emptiness of wonder, he observed the 
thing which he had glimpsed briefly in the past and was now seeing 
m the full ugliness of its futility: the spectacle of pleas for pity deliv- 
ered, in snarling hatred, as threats and as demands. 

“Lillian,” he said very quietly, “I would have it, even if it took 
your life.” 

She heard it She heard more than he was ready to know and to 
hear in his own words. r fhe shock, to him, was that she did not 
scream in answer, but that he saw her, instead, shrinking down into 
calm. ‘You have no right . . she said dully. It had the embarrassing 
helplessness of the words of a person who knows her own words to 
be meaningless. 

“Whatever claim you ma> have on me,” he said, “no human being 
can hold on another a claim demanding that he wipe himself out 
of existence,” 

“Does she mean as much as that to you?” 

“Much more than that.” 

The look of thought was returning to her face, bur in her face it 
had the quality of a lwk of cunning. She remained silent. 

“Lillian, I'm glad that you know the truth. Now you can make a 
choice with full understanding. You may divorce me — or you may 
ask that we continue as we are. That is the only choice you have. U 
is all I can offer you. I think you know f want you to divorce me. 
But 1 don’t ask for sacrifices. I don’t know what sort of comfort you 
tan find in our marriage, but if you do, l won’t ask you to give it 
up. 1 don’t know why you should want to hold me now, I don’t know 
what it is that I mean to you. I don’t know what you're seeking, 
what form of happiness is yours or what you will obtain from a 
situation which 1 see as intolerable lor both of us. By every standard 
of mine, you should have divorced me long ago. By every standard 
mine, to maintain our marriage will be a vicious fraud But my 
standards are not yours. I do not understand yours, l never have, 
hut I will accept them. If this is the manner of your love for me. if 

489 



bearing the name of my wife will give you some form of content- 
ment, 1 won’t take it away from you. It’s I who’ve broken my word, 
so I will atone for it to the extent l can. You know, of course, that 
I could buy one of those modern judges and obtain a divorce any 
time I wished. 1 won’t do it. I will keep my word, if you so desire, 
but this is the only form in which 1 can keep it. Now make your 
choice — but if >ou choose to hold me, you must never speak to me 
about her. you must never show her that you know, if you meet her 
in the future, you must never touch that part of my life." 

She stood still, looking up at him, the posture of her body slouched 
and loose, as if its sloppiness were a form of defiance, as if she did 
not care to resume for his sake the discipline of a graceful bearing. 

"Miss Dagny Taggart . . she said, and chuckled. “The super- 
woman whom common, average wives were not supposed to suspect. 
77ie woman who cared for nothing but business and dealt with men 
as a man. The woman of great spirit who admired you platonically, 
just for your genius, your mills and your Metal!” She chuckled. ”1 
should have known that she was just a bitch who wanted you in the 
same way as any bitch would want you — because you are fully as 
expert m bed as you are at a desk, if 1 am a judge of such matters. 
But she would appreciate that better than I, since she worships ex- 
pertness of any kind and since she had probably been laid by eveiy 
section hand on her railroad!" 

She stopped, because she saw, for the first time in her life, by 
what sort of look one learns that a man is capable of killing. But he 
was not looking at her. She was not sure whether he was seeing her 
at all or hearing her voice. 

He was hearing his own voice saying her words— saving them to 
Dagny in the sun-striped bedroom of Ellis Wyatt’s house, fie was 
seeing, in the nights behind him, Dagnv’s face in those moments 
when, his body leaving hers, she lay still with a look of radiance that 
was more than a smile, a look of youth, of early morning, of gratitude 
to the fact of one’s own existence. And he was seeing Lillian’s face, 
as he had seen it in bed beside him. a lifeless face with evasive eyes, 
with some feeble sneer on its lips and the look of sharing some 
smutty guilt. He saw who was the accuser and who the accused — he 
saw the obscenity of letting impotence hold itself as virtue and damn 
the power of living as a sin— he saw, with the clarity of direct percep- 
tion, in the shock of a single instant, the terrible ugliness of that 
which had once been his own belief. 

it was only an instant, a conviction without words, a knowledge 
grasped as a feeling, left unsealed by his mind. The shock brought 
him back to the sight of Lillian and to the sound of her words She 
appeared to him suddenly as some inconsequential presence that had 
to be dealt with at the moment. 

"‘Lillian," he said, in an unstressed voice that did noi grant her 
even the honor of anger, "you are not to speak of her tojme. If you 
ever do it again, 1 will answer you as 1 would answer a poodlum: I 
will beat you up. Neither you nor anyone else is to discuss her." 

She glanced at him. "Really?" she said. It had an odd, casual 
sound — as if the word were tossed away, leaving some hook im~ 

490 



planted in her mind. She seemed to be considering some sudden 
vision of her own. 

He said quietly, in weary astonishment, “1 thought you would be 
glad to discover the truth. I thought you would prefer to know— for 
the sake of whatever love or respect you felt for me — that if l be- 
trayed you, it was not cheaply and casually, it was not for a chorus 
girl, hut for the cleanest and most serious feeling of my life.” 

The ferocious spring with which she whirled to him was involun- 
tary, as was the naked twist of hatred in her face. “Oh, you god- 
damn fool!” 

He remained silent. 

Her composure returned, with the faint suggestion of a smile of 
secret mockery. “I believe you’re waiting for my answer?” she said. 
“No, 1 won’t divorce you. Don’t ever hope for that. We shall con- 
tinue as we are— if that is what you offered and if you think it can 
continue. See whether you can (lout all moral principles and get 
away with it!” 

He did not listen to her while she reached for her coat, telling 
him that she was going back to their home. He barely noticed it 
when the door closed after her. He stood motionless, held by a 
feeling he had never experienced before. He knew that he would 
have to think lalei. to think and understand, but for the moment he 
wanted nothing but to obseive the wonder of what he felt. 

It was a sense ol freedom, as if he stood alone in the midst of an 
endless sweep of dean air, with only the memory of some weight 
that had been torn off his shoillders. It was the feeling of an immense 
deliverance. It was the knowledge that it did not matter to him what 
Lillian felt, what she suffered or what became of her. and more: not 
only that it did not matter, but the shining, guiltless knowledge that 
it did not have to matter. 


Chapter V! MIRACLE METAL 

“But can we get away with it?” asked Wesley Mouch. His voice was 
high with anger and thin with fear. 

Nobody answered hint. James T aggart sat on the edge of an arm- 
chair not moving looking up at him from under his forehead. Orrcn 
Boyle gave a vicious tap against an ashtray, shaking the ash off his 
cigar. Dr. Floyd Ferris smiled Mr. Weathcrby folded his lips and 
hands. Fred Kinnan, head of the Amalgamated Labor of America, 
slopped pacing the office, sat down on the window sill and crossed 
his arms. Eugene L^awson, who had sat hunched downward, absent- 
mindedly rearranging a display of flowers on a low glass table, raised 
his torso resentfully and glanced up. Mouch sat at his desk, with his 
fist on a sheet of paper. 

It was Eugene Lawson who answered. “That’s not, it seems to me, 
the way to put it. We must not let vulgar difficulties obstruct our 
feeling that it’s a noble plan motivated solely by the public welfare. 
It’s fen* the good of the people. The people need it. Need comes first* 
so we don’t have to consider anything else.” 

491 



Nobody objected or picked it up; they looked as if Lawson had 
merely made it harder to continue the discussion. But a small man 
who sat unobtrusively in the best armchair of the room, apart from 
the others, content to be ignored and fully aware that none of them 
could be unconscious of his presence, glanced at Lawson, then at 
Mouch, and said with brisk cheerfulness, “That’s the line, Wesley. 
Tone it down and dress it up and get your press boys to chant it — 
and you won’t have to worry.” 

“Yes, Mr. Thompson,” said Mouch glumly. 

Mr. Thompson, the Head of the State, was a man who possessed 
the quality of never being noticed. In any group of three, his person 
became indistinguishable, and when seen alone it seemed to evoke 
a group of its own, composed of the countless persons he resembled. 
The country had no dear image of what he looked like/ his photo- 
graphs had appeared on the covers of magazines as frequently as 
those of his predecessors in office, but people could never be quite 
certain which photographs were his and which were pictures of “ a 
mail clerk” or “n white-collar worker,” accompanying articles about 
the daily life of the undifferentiated — except that Mr. Thompson’s 
collars were usually wilted. He had broad shoulders and a slight 
body. He had stringy hair, a wide mouth and an elastic age range 
that made him look like a harassed forty or an unusually vigorous 
sixty. Holding enormous official powers, he schemed ceaselessly to 
expand them, because it was expected of him by those \vho had 
pushed him into office. He had the cunning of the unintelligent and 
the frantic energy of the lazy. The sole secret of his rise in life was 
the fact that he was a product of chance and knew it and aspired to 
nothing else. 

“It’s obvious that measures have to be taken. Drastic measures,” 
said James Taggart, speaking, not to Mr. Thompson, but to Wesley 
Mouch. “We can’t let things go the way they’re going much longer.” 
His voice was belligerent and shaky. 

“Take it efcsy, Jim,” said Orren Boyle. 

“Something’s got to be done and done fast!” 

“Don’t look at me,” snapped Wesley Mouch. “I can’t help it. I 
can’t help it if people refuse to co-operate. I’m tied. I need wider 
powers.” 

Mouch had summoned them all to Washington, as his friends and 
personal advisers, for a private, unofficial conference on the national 
crisis. But, watching him, they were unable to decide whether his 
manner was overbearing or whining, whether he was threatening 
them or pleading for their help. 

“Fact is,” said Mr. Weathcrby primly, in a statistical torn? of voice, 
“that in the twelve-month period ending on the first of thi$ year, the 
rate of business failures has doubled, as compared with the jpreceding 
twelve-month period. Since the first of this year, it has trebled.” 

“Be sure they think it’s their own fault,” said Dr. Ferri£ casually. 

“Huh?” said Wesley Mouch, his eyes darting to Ferris. ? 

“Whatever you do, don’t apologize,” said Dr. Ferris. “Make them 
feel guilty.” 


492 



‘Tm not apologizing!” snapped Mouch. ‘Tin not to blame. 1 need 
wider powers/’ 

“But it is their own fault,” said Eugene Lawson, turning aggros*- 
sivcly to Dr. Ferris. “It’s their lack of social spirit. They refuse to 
recognize that production is not a private choice, but a public duty. 
They have no right to fail, no matter what conditions happen to 
come up. They’ve got to go on producing. It’s a social imperative. 
A man’s work is not a personal matter, it’s a social matter. There’s 
no such thing as a personal matter — or a personal life. That's what 
we’ve got to force them to learn.” 

“Gene Lawson knows what I’m talking about,” said Dr. Ferris, 
with a slight smile, “even though he hasn’t the faintest idea that 
he does.” 

“What do you think you mean?” asked Lawson, his voice rising. 

“Skip it,” ordered Wesley Mouch. 

“1 don’t care what you decide to do. Wesley,” said Mr. Thompson, 
“and I don’t care if the businessmen squawk about it. Just he sure 
you’ve got the press with you. Be damn sure about that.” 

“I’ve got ’em,” said Mouch. 

“One editor who’d open his trap at the wrong time could do us 
more harm than ten disgruntled millionaires.” 

“That’s true, Mr. Thompson/' said Dr. Ferris. “But can you name 
one editor who knows it?” 

“Guess not/’ said Thompson; he sounded pleased. 

“Whatever type ot men weTe counting on and planning for,” said 
Dr. Ferris, “there’s a certain old-fashioned quotation which wc may 
safely forget: the one about counting on the wise and the honest. 
We don’t have to consider them. They’re out of date.” 

James Taggart glanced at the window There were patches of blue 
in the sky above the spacious streets of Washington, the faint blue 
of mid-April, and a few beams breaking through the clouds. A monu- 
ment stood shining in the distance, hit by a ray of sun: it was a tall, 
white obelisk, erected to the memory of the man Dr. Ferris was 
quoting, the man in whose honor this city had been named. James 
Taggart looked away. 

“1 don't like the professor’s remarks.” said Lawson loudly and 
sullenly. 

“Keep still,” said Wesley Mouch. “Dr. Ferris is not talking theory, 
but practice.” 

“Well, if you want to talk practice,” said Fred Kinnan, “then let 
me tell you that we can’t worry about businessmen at a time like 
this. What we’ve got to think about is jobs. More jobs tor the people. 
In my unions, every man who’s working is feeding five who aren't, 
run counting his own pack of starving relatives. If you want my 
advice — oh, I know you won’t go for it, but it’s just a thought — issue 
a directive making it compulsory to add, say, onc~third more men 
to every payroll m the country.” 

‘Good God!” yelled Taggart. “Are you crazy? We can barely 
meet our payrolls as it is! There’s not enough work for the men 
we’ve* got now! One-third more? We wouldn’t have any use for 
them whatever!” 


493 



“Who cares whether you’d have any use for them?” said Fred 
Kinnan. “They need jobs. That’s what comes first— need — doesn’t 
it? — not your profits.” 

“It’s not a question of profits!” yelled Taggart hastily. “I haven’t 
said anything about profits. I haven’t given you any grounds to insult 
me. It’s just a question of where in hell we’d get the money to pay 
your men — when half our trains are running empty and there’s not 
enough freight to fill a trolley car.” His voice slowed down suddenly 
to a tone of cautious thoughtfulness: “However, we do understand 
the plight of the working men, and — it’s just a thought — we could, 
perhaps, take on a certain extra number, if we were permitted to 
double our freight rates, which — ” 

“Have you lost your mind?” yelled Orren Boyle. “I’m going broke 
on the rates you’re charging now, 1 shudder every time a damn 
boxcar pulls in or out of the mills, they’re bleeding me to death, 1 
can’t afford it — and you want to double it?” 

“It is not essential whether you can afford it or not,” said Taggart 
coldly. “You have to be prepared to make some sacrifices. The public 
needs railroads. Need comes first — above your profits.” 

“What profits?” yelled Orren Boyle. “When did 1 ever make any 
profits? Nobody can accuse me of running a profit-making business! 
Just look at my balance sheet — and then look at the books of a 
certain competitor of mine, who’s got all the customers, all the raw 
materials, all the technical advantages and a monopoly on secret 
formulas — then tell me who’s the profiteer! . . . But, of course, the 
public does need railroads, and perhaps I could manage to absorb a 
certain raise in rales, if I were to get — it’s just a thought— if I were 
to get a subsidy to carry me over the next year or two, until I catch 
my stride and — ” 

“What? Again?” yelled Mr. Weatherby, losing his primness. “How 
many loans have you got from us and how many extensions, suspen- 
sions and moratoriums? You haven’t repaid a penny — and with all 
of you boys going broke and the tax receipts crashing, where do you 
expect us to get the money to hand you a subsidy?” 

“There arc people who aren’t broke,” said Boyle slowly. “You 
boys have no excuse for permitting all that need and misery to spread 
through the country — so long as there are people who aren’t broke.” 

“I can’t help it!” yelled Wesley Mouch. “I can’t do anything about 
it! I need wider powers!” 

They could not tell what had prompted Mr. Thompson to attend 
this particular conference. He had said little, but had listened with 
interest. It seemed as if there was something which he had wanted 
to learn, and now he looked as if he had learned it. He stood up 
and smiled cheerfully. 

“Go ahead, Wesley,” he said. “Go ahead with Number 10-289. 
You won’t have any trouble at all.” 

They had all risen to their leel, in gloomily reluctant Reference. 
Wesley Mouch glanced down at his sheet of paper, then! said in a 
petulant tone of voice, “If you want me to go ahead, you)l have to 
declare a state of total emergency.” 

“I’ll declare it any time you’re ready.” 

494 



‘"There are certain difficulties, which — ” 

“HI leave it to you. Work it out any way you wish. It’s your job. 
Let me see the rough draft, tomorrow or next day, but don’t bother 
me about the details. I’ve got a speech to make on the radio in half 
an hour.” 

“The chief difficulty is that Fm not sure whether the law actually 
grants us the power to put into effect certain provisions of Directive 
Number 10-289. I fear they might be open to challenge.” 

“Oh, hell, we’ve passed so many emergency laws that if you hunt 
through them, you’re sure to dig up something that will cover it.” 

Mr. Thompson turned to the others with a smile of good fellow- 
ship. “I’ll leave you boys to iron out the wrinkles,” he said, “f ap- 
preciate your coming to Washington to help us out. Glad to have 
seen you.” 

They waited until the door closed after him, then resumed their 
seals; they did not look at one another. 

They had not heard the text of Directive No. 10-289. but they 
knew what it would contain. They had known it for a long time, in 
that special manner which consisted of keeping secrets from oneself 
and leaving knowledge untranslated into words. And, by the same 
method, they now wished it were possible for them not to hear the 
words of the directive. It was to avoid moments such as this that all 
the complex twistings of their minds had been devised. 

They wished the directive to go into effect. They wished it could 
be put into effect without words, so that they would not have to 
know that what they were doing was what it was. Nobody had ever 
announced that Directive No. 10-289 was the final goal of his efforts. 
Yet, for generations past, men had worked to make it possible, and 
lor months past, every provision of it had been prepared for by count- 
less speeches, articles, sermons, editorials — by purposeful voices that 
screamed with anger if anyone named their purpose. 

“The picture now is this,” said Wesley Mouch. “The economic 
condition of the country was better the year before last than it was 
last year, and last year it was better than it is at present. It’s obvious 
that we would not be able to survive another year of the same pro- 
gression. Therefore, our sole objective must now be to hold the fine. 
To stand still in order to catch our stride. To achieve total stability. 
Freedom has been given a chance and has failed. Therefore, more 
stringent controls are necessary. Since men are unable and unwilling 
to solve their problems voluntarily, they must be forced to do it.” 
He paused, picked up the sheet of paper, then added in a less forma! 
tone of voice, “Hell, what it comes down to is that we can manage 
to exist as and where we are, but we can’t afford to move! So we’ve 
got to stand still. We’ve got to stand still. We’ve got to make those 
bastards stand still!” 

His head drawn into his shoulders, he was looking at them with 
the anger of a man declaring that the country’s troubles were a 
personal affront to him. So many men seeking favors had been afraid 
of him that he now acted as if his anger were a solution to everything, 
as if his anger were omnipotent, as if all he had to do was to get 
angry. Yet, facing him, the men who sat in a silent semicircle before 

495 



his desk were uncertain whether the presence of fear in the room 
was their own emotion or whether the hunched figure behind the 
desk generated the panic of a cornered rat. 

Wesley Mouch had a long, square face and a flat-topped skull, 
made more so by a brush haircut. His lower lip was a petulant bulb 
and the pale, brownish pupils of his eyes looked like the yolks of 
eggs smeared under the not fully translucent whites. His facial mus- 
cles moved abruptly, and the movement vanished, having conveyed 
no expression. No one had ever seen him smile. 

Wesley Mouch came from a family that had known neither poverty 
nor wealth nor distinction for many generations; it had clung, how- 
ever, to a tradition of its own: that of being college-bred and, there- 
fore, of despising men who were in business. The family’s diplomas 
had always hung on the wall in the manner of a reproach to the 
world, because the diplomas had not automatically produced the 
material equivalents of their attested spiritual value. Among the fam- 
ily’s numerous relatives, there was one rich uncle. He had married 
his money and, in his widowed old age, he had picked Wesley as his 
favorite from among his many nephews and nieces, because Wesley 
was the least distinguished of ibe lot and therefore, thought Uncle 
Julius, the safest. Uncle Julius did not care for people who were 
brilliant. He did nut care for the trouble of managing his money, 
either; so he turned the job over to Wesley. By the time Wesley 
graduated from college, there was no money to manage. Uncle Julius 
blamed it on Wesley’s cunning and cried that Wesley was an unscru- 
pulous schemer. But there had been no scheme about it; Wesley 
could not have said just where the money had gone. In high school, 
Wesley Mouch had been one of the worst students and had passion- 
ately envied those who were the best. College taught him that he 
did not have to envy them at all. After graduation, he took a job m 
the advertising department of a company that manufactured a bogus 
corn-cure. The cure sold well and he rose to be the head ol his 
department. He left it to take charge of the advertising of a hair- 
restorer, then of a patented brassiere, then of a new soap, then of 
a soft drink — and then he became advertising vice president of an 
automobile concern. He tried to sell automobiles as if they were a 
bogus corn-cure. They did not sell He blamed it on the insufficiency 
of his advertising budget. It was the president of the automobile 
concern who recommended him to Reardon. It was Rearden who 
introduced him to Washington — Rearden, who knew no standard by 
which to judge the activities of his Washington man. It was James 
Taggart who gave him a start in the Bureau of Economic Planning 
and National Resources — in exchange for double-crossing Rearden 
in order to help Orren Boyle in exchange for destroying Pan Con- 
way, From then on, people helped Wesley Mouch to advance, for 
the same reason as that which had prompted Unde Julius: they were 
people who believed that mediocrity was safe. The men ) who now 
sat in front of his desk had been taught that the law of causality was 
a superstition and that one had to deal with the situation of the 
moment without considering its cause. By the situation of the mo- 
ment, they had concluded that Wesley Mouch was a man of superla- 

496 



tive skill and cunnings since millions aspired to power, but he was 
the one who had achieved it. It was not within their method of 
thinking to know that Wesley Mouch was the zero at the meeting 
point of forces unleashed in destruction against one another. 

“This is just a rough draft of Directive Number 10-289," said 
Wesley Mouch, “which Gene, Clem and I have dashed off just to 
give you the general idea. We want to hear your opinions, sugges- 
tions and so forth— you being the representatives of labor, industry, 
transportation and the professions." 

Fred Kinnan got off the window sill and sat down on the arm of 
a chair. Orren Boyle spit out the butt of his cigar. James Taggart 
looked down at his own hands. Dr. Ferris was the only one who 
seemed to be at case. 

“In the name of the general welfare/’ read Wesley Mouch, “to 
protect the people’s security, to achieve full equality and total stabil- 
ity. it is decreed for the duration of the national emergency that — 

“Point One. All workers, wage earners and employees of any kind 
whatsoever shall hencelorth be attached to their jobs and shall not 
leave not be dismissed nor change employment, under penalty of a 
term in jail. The penalty shall be determined by the Unification 
Board, such Board to he appointed by the Bureau of Economic 
Planning and National Resources. All persons reaching the age of 
twenty-one shall report to the Unification Board, which shall assign 
them to where, in its opinion, their services will best serve the inter- 
ests of the nation. 

“Point Two. All industrial, commercial, manufacturing and busi- 
ness establishments of any nature whatsoever shall henceforth re- 
main in operation, and the owners of such establishments shall not 
quit nor leave nor retire, nor dose, sell or transfer their business, 
under penalty of the nationalization of their establishment and of 
any and all of their property. 

“Point Three. AH patents and copyrights, pertaining to any de- 
vices. inventions, formulas, processes and works of any nature what- 
soever, shall be turned over to the nation as a patriotic emergency 
gift by means of Gift Certificates to be signed voluntarily by the 
owners of all such patents and copyrights. The Unification Board 
shall then license the use ot such patents and copyrights to all appli- 
cants, equally and without discrimination, for the purpose of elimi- 
nating monopolistic practices, discarding obsolete products and 
making the best available to the whole nation. No trademarks, 
brand names or copyrighted titles shall be used. Eveiv formerly pat- 
ented product shall be known by a new name and sold by all manu- 
lacturers under the same name, such name to be selected by the 
Unification Board. All private trademarks and brand names are 
hereby abolished. 

“Point Four. No new devices, inventions, products, or goods of 
any nature whatsoever, not now on the market, shall be produced, 
invented, manufactured or sold after the date of this directive. The 
Office of Patents and Copyrights is hereby suspended. 

"Point Five. Every establishment, concern, corporation or person 
engaged in production of any nature whatsoever shall henceforth 

497 



produce the same amount of goods per year as it, they or he pro- 
duced during the Basic Year, no more and no less. The year to be 
known as the Basic or Yardstick Year is to be the year ending on 
the date of this directive. Over or under production shall be fined, 
such fines to be determined by the Unification Board. 

“Point Six. Every person of any age, sex, class or income, shall 
henceforth spend the same amount of money on the purchase of 
goods per year as he or she spent during the Basic Year, no more 
and no less. Over or under purchasing shall be fined, such fines to 
be determined by the Unification Board. 

'‘Point Seven. All wages, prices, salaries, dividends, profits, interest 
rates and forms of income of any nature whatsoever, shall be frozen 
at their present figures, as of the date of this directive. 

“Point Eight. AH cases arising from and rules not specifically pro- 
vided for in this directive, shall be settled and determined by the 
Unification Board, whose decisions will be final.” 

There was, even within the four men who had listened, a remnant 
of human dignity, which made them siL still and feci sick for the 
length of one minute. 

James Taggart spoke first. His voice was low, but it had the 
trembling intensity of an involuntary scream: '‘Well, why not? Why 
should they have it, if we don’t? Why should they stand above us? 
If we are to perish, let’s make sure that we all perish together. Let’s 
make sure that we leave them no chance to survive!” 

“That’s a damn funny thing to say about a very practical plan that 
will benefit everybody,” said Orren Boyle shrilly, looking at Taggart 
in frightened astonishment. 

Dr. Ferris chuckled. 

Taggart’s eyes seemed to focus, and he said, his voice louder, “Yes, 
of course. It’s a very practical plan. It’s necessary, practical and just. 
It will solve everybody's problems. It will give everybody a chance 
to feel safe. A chance to rest.” 

“It will give security to the people,” said Eugene Lawson, his 
mouth slithering into a smile. “Security — that’s what the people 
want. If they want it, why shouldn’t they have it? Just because a 
handful of rich will object?” 

“It’s not the rich who’ll object,” said Dr. Ferris lazily. “The rich 
drool for security more than any other sort of animal — haven't you 
discovered that yet?” 

“Well, who’ll object?” snapped Lawson. 

Dr. Ferris smiled pointedly, and did not answer. 

Lawson looked away. “To hell with them! Why should we worry 
about them ? We’ve got to run the world for the sake of the little 
people. It’s intelligence that’s caused all the troubles of humanity. 
Man’s mind is the root of all evil. This is the day of tho heart. It’s 
the weak, the meek, the sick and the humble that must >e the only 
objects of our concern.” His lower lip was twisting in sof^, lecherous 
motions. “Those who’ re big are here to serve those who aren’t. If 
they refuse to do their moral duty, we’ve got to lorce t|em. There 
once was an Age of Reason, but we’ve progressed beydnd it. This 
is the Age of Love.” 


498 



“Shut up!” screamed James Taggart. 

They all stared at him. “For Christ’s sake, Jim, what’s the matter?'* 
said Orren Boyle, shaking. 

“Nothing,” said Taggart, “nothing . . . Wesley, keep him still, 
will you?” 

Mouch said uncomfortably, “But I fail to see — ” 

“Just keep him still. We don’t have to listen to him, do we?” 

“Why, no, but — ” 

“Then let’s go on.” 

“What is this?” demanded Lawson. “1 resent it I most emphati- 
cally — ” But he saw no support in the faces around him and stopped, 
his mouth sagging into an expression of pouting hatred. 

“Let's go on,” said Taggart feverishly. 

“What's the matter with you?” asked Orren Boyle, trying not to 
know what was the matter with himself and why he felt frightened. 

“Genius is a superstition, Jim,” said Dr. Ferris slowly, with an odd 
kind of emphasis, as if knowing that he was naming the unnamed in 
all their minds. “There’s no such thing as the intellect A man's brain 
is a social product. A sum of influences that he’s picked up from 
those around him. Nobody invents anything, he merely reflects 
what's floating in the social atmosphere A genius is an intellectual 
scavenger and a greedy hoarder of the ideas which rightfully belong 
to society, from which he stole them. All thought is theft, if we do 
away with private fortunes, we’ll have a taircr distribution of wealth. 
11 we do away with genius, we ll have a fairer distribution of ideas.” 

**/\re we here to talk business or are we here to kid one another?” 
asked Fred Kinnnn. 

7 hey turned to him He was a muscular man with large features, 
hut his face had the astonishing property of finely drawn lines that 
raised the corners of his mouth into the permanent hint of a wise, 
sardonic grin He sat on the arm of the chair, hands in pockets, 
looking at Mouch with the smiling glance of a hardened policeman 
at a shoplifter. 

“All I’ve got to say is that you'd better staff that Unification Board 
with my men,” he said “Better make sure of it, brother — or I'll blast 
your Point One to hell.” 

“1 intend, of course, to have a representative of labor on that 
Board,” said Mouch dryly, “as well as a representative of industry, 
of the professions and of every cross-section of--" 

“No cross-sections,” said Fred Kinnau evenly. “Just representa- 
tives of labor. Period.” 

“What the hell!” yelled Orren Boyle. “That’s stacking the cards, 
isn't it *” 

“Sute,” said Fred Kinnan. 

“But that will give you a stranglehold on every business in the 
country!” 

“What do you think I'm after?” 

“That’s unfair!” yelled Boyle. “I won't stand for it! You have no 
right!* You — ” 

“Right?” said Kinnan innocently. “Are we talking about rights?” 

499 



“But, I mean, after all, there are certain fundamental property 
rights which — ” 

"‘Listen, pal, you want Point Three, don’t you?” 

“Well, I — ” 

“Then you’d better keep your trap shut about property rights from 
now on. Keep it shut tight.” 

“Mr. Kinnan,” said Dr. Ferris, “you must not make the old- 
fashioned mistake of drawing wide generalizations. Our policy has 
to be flexible. There are no absolute principles which — ” 

“Save it for Jim Taggart, Doc,” said Fred Kinnan. “I know what 
I’m talking about. That’s because 1 never went to college.” 

‘i object,” said Boyle, “to your dictatorial method of — ” 

Kinnan turned his back on him and said, “Listen, Wesley, my boys 
won’t like Point One. If I get to run things. I’ll make them swallow 
it. If not, not. Just make up your mind.” 

"Well — ” said Mouch. and stopped. 

“For Christ's sake, Wesley, what about us?” yelled Taggart. 

“You'll come to me,” said Kinnan, “when you’ll need a deal to 
fix the Board. But I’ll run that Board. Me and Wesley.” 

“Do you think the country will stand for it?” yelled Taggart. 

“Stop kidding yourself,” said Kinnan. “The country? If there 
aren't any principles any more —and 1 guess the doc is right, because 
there sure aren’t if there aren’t any rules to this game and it's only 
a question of who robs whom — then I've got more votes than the 
bunch of you, there are more workers than employers, and don’t 
you forget it, boys!” 

“That's a funny altitude to take.” said Taggart haughtily, “about 
a measure which, after all, is not designed for the selfish benefit of 
workers or employers, but for the general welfare of the public.” 

“Okay,” said Kinnan amiably, “let’s talk your lingo. Who is the 
public? If you go by quality— then it ain't you, Jim, and it ain’t Orrie 
Boyle. If you go by quantity — then it sure is me, because quantity is 
what I've got behind me.” His smile disappeared, and with a sudden, 
bitter look of weariness he added, “Only I’m not going to say that 
Fm working for the welfare of my public, because I know I’m not. 
I know that Fm delivering the poor bastards into slavery, and that’s 
ail there is to it. And they know it, too. But they know that Fll have 
to throw them a crumb once in a while, if I want to keep my racket, 
while with the rest of you they wouldn’t have a chance in hell. So 
that’s why. if they’ve got to be under a whip, they’d Tather / held 
it, not you — you drooling, tear-jerking, mealy-mouthed bastards of 
the public welfare! Do you think that outside of your college-bred 
pansies there’s one village idiot whom you're fooling? Fm a racke- 
teer — but I know it and my boys know it, and they kno^ that I’ll 
pay off. Not out of the kindness of iny heart, either, and pot a cent 
more than I can get away with, but at least they can coupt on that 
much. Sure, it makes me sick sometimes, it makes me sick bright now, 
but it’s not me who’s built this kind of world — you ditl — so Fm 
playing the game as you’ve set it up and Fm going to plaiy it for as 
long as it lasts — which isn’t going to be long for any of us!” 

500 



He stood up. No one answered him. He let his eyes move slowly 
from face to face and stop on Wesley Mouch. 

“Do I get the Board, Wesley?” he asked casually. 

“The selection of the specific personnel is only a technical detail,” 
said Mouch pleasantly, “Suppose we discuss it later, you and I?” 

Everybody in the room knew that this meant the answer Yes. 

“Okay, pal,” said Kinnan. He went back to the window, sat down 
on the sill and lighted a cigarette. 

For some unadmitted reason, the others were looking at Dr. Ferns, 
as if seeking guidance. 

“Don’t be disturbed by oratory.” said Dr. Ferris smoothly. “Mr. 
Kinnan is a fine speaker, but he has no sense of practical reality. He 
is unable to think dialectically.” 

There was another silence, then James Taggart spoke up suddenly. 
“I don’t care. It doesn't matter. He’ll have to hold things still. Every- 
thing will have to remain as it is. Just as it is. Nobody will be permit- 
ted to change anything. Except — ” He turned sharply to Wesley 
Mouch. “Wesley, under Point Four, we’ll have to close all research 
departments, experimental laboratories, scientific foundations and all 
the rest of the institutions of that kind. They'll have to be forbidden.” 

“Yes, that’s right,” said Mouch. i hadn’t thought of that. We’ll 
have to stick m a couple of fines about that ” He hunted around for 
a pencil and made a few scrawls on the margin of his paper. 

“It will end wasteful competition,” said James Taggart. “We'll stop 
scrambling to beat one another to the untried and the unknown. We 
won’t have to worry about new inventions upsetting the market. We 
won'! have to pour money down the drain in useless experiments 
lust to keep up with overambitious competitors.” 

“Yes,” said Orren Boyle. “Nobody should be allowed to waste 
money on the new until everybody has plenty of the old. Close all 
I hose damn research laboratories — and the sooner, the better.” 

“Yes,” said Wesley Mouch. “We'll close them. AU of them,” 

“The State Science Institute, loo?” asked Fred Kinnan. 

“Oh, no!” said Mouch. “Thai’s different That’s government. Be- 
sides, it's a non-profit institution. And it will be sufficient to take 
care of all scientific progress.” 

“Quite sufficient,” said Dr. Ferris, 

“And what will become of all the engineers, professors and such, 
when you close all those laboratories?” asked Fred Kinnan. “What 
are they going to do for a living, with all the other jobs and busi- 
nesses frozen?” 

“Oh,” said Wesley Mouch. He scratched his head. He turned to 
Mr Weatherby. “Do we put them on relief, Clem?” 

“No,” said Mr. Weatherby. “What for? There's not enough of 
them to raise a squawk. Not enough to matter.'’ 

“1 suppose,” said Mouch, turning to Dr. Ferris, “that you’ll be 
able to absorb some of them, Floyd?” 

“Some,” said Dr. Ferris slowly, as if relishing every syllable of his 
answer. “Those who prove co-operative.” 

‘ What about the rest?” said Fred Kinnan. 

501 



“They'll have to wait till the Unification Board finds some use for 
them," said Wesley Mouch. 

“What will they eat while they're waiting?" 

Mouch shrugged. “There's got to be some victims in times of na- 
tional emergency. It can't be helped." 

“We have the right to do it!" cried Taggart suddenly, in defiance 
to the stillness of the room. "We need it. We need it, don't we?" 
There was no answer. “We have the right to protect our livelihood!" 
Nobody opposed him, but he went on with a shrill, pleading, insis- 
tence. "We'll be safe for the first time in centuries. Everybody will 
know his place and job, and everybody elsc’s place and job — and we 
won’t be at the mercy of every stray crank with a new idea. Nobody 
will push us out of business or steal our markets or undersell us or 
make us obsolete. Nobody will come to us offering some damn new 
gadget and putting us on the spot to decide whether we'll lose our 
shirt if we buy it, or whether we'll lose our shirt if we don't but 
somebody else does! We won't have to decide. Nobody will be per- 
mitted to decide anything. It will be decided once and for all." His 
glance moved pleadingly from face to face. “There's been enough 
invented already — enough for everybody's comfort — why should 
they be allowed to go on inventing? Why should we permit them to 
blast the ground from under our feet every few steps? Why should 
we be kept on the go in eternal uncertainty? Just because of a tew 
restless, ambitious adventurers? Should we sacrifice the contentment 
of the whole of mankind to the greed of a few non-conformists? We 
don't need them. We don’t need them at all. 1 wish we'd get rid of 
that hero worship! Heroes? They’ve done nothing but harm, all 
through history They’ve kept mankind running a wild race, with no 
breathing spell, no rest, no ease, no security Running to catch up 
with them . . . always, without end . . Just as we catch up, they’re 
years ahead. . They leave us no chance . . . They've never left us 
a chance. . . His eyes were moving restlessly; he glanced at the 
window, but looked hastily away: he did not want to see the white 
obelisk in the. distance. “We’re through with them. We've won. This 
is our age. Our world. We're going to have security — for the first 
time in centuries — for the first lime since the beginning of the indus- 
trial revolution 1 " 

“Well, this, I guess," said Fred Kinnan, “is the anti-industrial 
revolution." 

“That’s a damn funny thing for you to say!" snapped Wesley 
Mouth. “We can't be permitted to say that to the public." 

"Don’t worry, brother. I won’t say it to the public." 

“It ? s a total fallacy," said Dr. Ferris. “It’s a statement prompted 
by ignorance. Every expert has conceded long ago that a planned 
economy achieves the maximum of productive efficiency and that 
centralization leads to super-industrialization." * 

“Centralization destroys the blight of monopoly," said Boyle. 

“How’s that again?" drawled Kinnan. 

Boyle did not catch the tone of mockery, and answered Earnestly, 
“It destroys the blight of monopoly. It leads to the democratization 
of industry. It makes everything available to everybody. How, for 

502 



instance, at a time like this, when there’s such a desperate shortage of 
iron ore, is there any sense in my wasting money, labor and national 
resources on making old-fashioned steel, when there exists a much 
better metal that I could be making? A metal that everybody wants, 
but nobody can get. Now is that good economics or sound social 
efficiency or democratic justice? Why shouldn’t f be allowed to man- 
ufacture that metal and why shouldn't the people get it when they 
need it? Just because of the private monopoly of one selfish individ- 
ual? Should we sacrifice our rights to his personal interests?” 

‘Skip it, brother,” said Fred Kinnan. “Fve read it all in the same 
newspapers you did.” 

“I don't like your altitude.'' said Boyle, in a sudden tone of righ- 
teousness, with a look which, in a barroom, would have signified a 
prelude to a fist fight. He sat up straight, buttressed by the columns 
ot paragraphs on yellow tinged paper, which he was seeing in his 
mind: 

“At a time of crucial public need, are we to waste social 
effort on the manufacture of obsolete products? Are we 
to let the many remain in want while the few withhold 
from us the better products and methods available? Are 
we to be stopped by the superstition of patent rights?” 

“Is it not obvious that private industry is unable to cope 
with the present economic crisis? How long, for instance, 
are we going to put up with the disgraceful shortage of 
Reardon Metal? Thetc is a crying public demand for it, 
which Reardon has failed to supply."’ 

“When are we going to put an end to economic injustice 
and special privileges? Why should Rearden be the only 
one permitted to manufacture Rearden Metal?” 

“1 don’t like your attitude,” said Orren Boyle “So long as we 
icspect the rights of the workers, we'll want you to respect the rights 
of the industrialists.” 

“Which rights of which industrialists?” drawled Kinnan. 

“I'm inclined to think,” said Dr. Ferris hastily, “that Point Two, 
perhaps, is the most essential one of all at present. We must put an 
end to that peculiar business of industrialists retiring and vanishing. 
We must stop them. It’s playing havoc with our entire economy ” 

“Why are they doing it?” asked Taggart nervously. “Where are 
they all going?” 

“Nobody knows,” said Dr. Ferris. “We've been unable to find any 
information or explanation. But it must be stopped. In times of crisis, 
economic service to the nation is just as much of a duty as military 
service. Anyone who abandons it should be regarded as a deserter. 
I have recommended that we introduce the death penalty for those 
men, but Wesley wouldn’t agree to it” 

“Take it easy, boy,” said Fred Kinnan in an odd. slow voice. He 
sat suddenly and perfectly still, his arms crossed, looking at Ferris 
in a manner that made it suddenly real to the room that Ferris had 

503 



proposed murder. “Don't let me hear you talk about any death pen- 
alties in industry." 

Dr. Ferris shrugged. 

“We don’t have to go to extremes,” said Mouoh hastily. ‘‘We don't 
want to frighten people We want to have them on our side. Our 
top problem is. will they . . . will they accept it at all?” 

“They will,” said Dr. Ferris. 

‘Tm a little worried," said Eugene Lawson, “about Points Three 
and Four. Faking over the patents is line. Nobody’s going to defend 
industrialists. But I'm worried about taking over the copyrights. 
That’s going to antagonize the intellectuals. It’s dangerous. It’s a 
spiritual issue. Doesn't Point Four mean that no new books are to 
be written or published from now on?” 

“Yes,” said Mouch, “it does. But we can’t make an exception for 
the book-publishing business. It s an industry like any other. When 
we say ‘no new products,’ it's got to mean no new products.' ” 

“But this is a matter ot the spirit,” said Lawson; his voice had a 
tone, not of rational respect, but of superstitious awe. 

“We’re not interfering with anybody’s spirit. But when you print 
a book on paper, it becomes a material commodity— and if we grant 
an exception to one commodity, we won't be able to hold the others 
in line and we won't be able to make anything stick.” 

“Yes. that’s ttue. But — ” 

“Don’t be a chump. Gene," said Dj. Ferris. “You don't want some 
recalcitrant hacks to come out with treatises that wall wreck oui 
entire program, do >ou? If you breathe the word ‘censorship’ now, 
they'll all scream bloody murdei They're not ready for it— as yet. 
But if you leave the spirit alone and make it a simple material issue - 
not a matter of ideas, but just a matter ot paper, ink and printing 
presses — you accomplish your purpose much more smoothly. You'll 
make sure that nothing dangerous gets printed 01 heard- -and no- 
body is going to light over a matenal issue.” 

“Yes, but . . . but l don’t think the writers will like it.” 

“Are you* sure?” asked Wesley Mouch. with a glance that was 
almost a smile. “Don’t forget that under Point Five, the publishers 
will have to publish as many books as they did in the Basic Yeai. 
Since there will be no new ones, they will have to reprint and the 
public will have to buy some ot the old ones. There aie many very 
worthy books that have never had a fair chance.” 

“Oh,” said Lawson; he remembered that he had seen Mouch 
lunching with Balph Eubank two weeks ago. 1 hen he shook his head 
and frowned. “Still, I'm worried The intellectuals are our friends. 
We don't want to lose them. They can make an awful lot of trouble.” 

“They won’t,” said Fred Kinnan. “Your kind of intellectuals are 
the first to scream when it’s safe— and the first to shut their traps at 
the first sign of danger. They spend years spitting at the; man who 
feeds them— and they lick the hand of the man who slaps their drool- 
ing faces. Didn’t they deliver every country of Europe.ume after 
another* to committees of goons, just like this one here? Ijidn’t they 
scream their heads off to shut out every burglar alarm an& to break 
every padlock open for the goons? Have you heard a peep out of 

504 



them since? Didn’t they scream that they were the friends of labor? 
Do you hear them raising their voices about the chain gangs* the 
slave camps, the fourteen-hour workday and the mortality from 
scurvy in the People’s States of Europe? No, but you do hear them 
telling the whip-beaten wretches that starvation is prosperity, that 
slavery* is freedom, that torture chambers are brother-love and that 
if the wretches don’t understand it, then it’s their own fault that they 
suffer, and it's the mangled corpses in the jail cellars who re to blame 
for all their troubles, not the benevolent leaders! Intellectuals? You 
might have to worry about any other breed of men. but not about 
the modern intellectuals: they’ll swallow anything. 1 don’t feel so safe 
about the lousiest wharf rat in the longshoremen’s union: he’s liable 
to remember suddenly that he is a man — and then 1 won’t be able to 
keep him in line. Hut the intellectuals? That’s the one thing they’ve 
forgotten long ago. I guess it’s the one thing that all their education 
was aimed to make them forget. Do anything you please to the 
intellectuals. They’ll take it.” 

“For once,” said Dr. Ferris, “1 agree with Mr. Kinnan. 1 agree 
with his facts, if not with his feelings. You don't have to worry about 
the intellectuals, Wesley. Just put a few of them on the government 
payioll and ‘send them out to preach precisely the sort of thing Mr. 
Kinnan mentioned: that the blame rests on the victims. Give them 
moderately comfortable salaries and extremely loud titles— and 
they'll forget their copyrights and do a better job for you than whole 
squads of enforcement officers." 

“Yes,” said Mouch. “I know/’ 

“The danger that I'm worried about will come from a different 
quaiter.” said Dr Ferris thoughtfully. “You might run into quite a 
bit of trouble on that ‘voluntary Gift C ertificate’ business, Wesley.” 

“I know,” said Mouch glumly. "That’s the point I wanted Thomp- 
son to help us out on. But I guess he can’t. We don't actually have 
the legal power to seize the patents. Oh, there's plenty of clauses in 
dozens of laws that can be stretched to cover it — almost, but not 
quite. Any tycoon who'd want to make a test case would have a 
vety good chance to beat us. And we have to preserve a semblance 
of legality — or the populace won't take it.” 

“Precisely,” said Dr Ferris. “It’s extremely important to get those 
patents turned over to us voluntarily. Even if we had a law permitting 
outright nationalization, it would be much better to get them as a 
gift. We want to leave the people the illusion that they're still pre- 
serving their private property rights. And most of them will play 
along. They'll sign the Gift Certificates. Just raise a lot of noise about 
its being a patriotic duty and that anyone who refuses is a prince of 
gieed. and they’ll sign. But — ” He stopped. 

“I know,” said Mouch; he was growing visibly mote nervous. 
“There will be. I think, a few old-fashioned bastards here and there 
who’ll refuse to sign — but they won’t be prominent enough to make 
a noise, nobody will hear about it, their own communities and friends 
will turn against them for their being selfish, so it won’t give us any 
trouble*. We’ll just take the patents over, anyway— and those guys 

505 



won’t have the nerve or the money to start a test case; But — ” He 
stopped. 

James Taggart leaned back in his chair, watching them; he was 
beginning to enjoy the conversation. 

“Yes,'’ said Dr, Ferris, “I’m thinking of it, too. I’m thinking of a 
certain tycoon who is in a position to blast us to pieces. Whether 
we’ll recover the pieces or not, is hard to tell. God knows what is 
liable to happen at a hysterical time like the present and in a situa- 
tion as delicate as this. Anything can throw everything off balance. 
Blow up the whole works. And if there’s anyone who wants to do 
it. he does. He does and can. He knows the real issue, he knows the 
things which must not be said — and he is not afraid to say them. 
He knows the one dangerous, fatally dangerous weapon. He is our 
deadliest adversary.’’ 

“Who?” asked Lawson. 

Dr. Ferris hesitated, shrugged and answered, “The guiltless man.” 

Lawson stared blankly. “What do you mean and whom are you 
talking about?” 

James Taggart smiled. 

“I mean that there is no way to disarm any man,” said Dr. Ferris, 
“except through guilt. Through that which he himself has accepted 
as guilt. If a man has ever stolen a dime, you can impose on him 
the punishment intended for a bank robber and he will take it. He’ll 
bear any form of misery, he’ll feel that he deserves no better. If 
there's not enough guilt in the world, we must create it. If we teach 
a man that it’s evil to look at spring flowers and he believes us and 
then does it — we’ll be able to do whatever we please with him. He 
won’t defend himself. He won't feel he’s worth it. He won’t fight. 
But save us from the man who lives up to his own standards. Save 
us from the man of clean conscience. He’s the man who’ll beat us.” 

“Are you talking about Henry Rearden?” asked Taggart, his voice 
peculiarly clear. 

The one name they had not wanted to pronounce struck them into 
an instant’s silence. 

“What if I were?” asked Dr. Ferris cautiously. 

^Oh, nothing,” said Taggart. “Only, if you were, 1 would tell you 
that I can deliver Henry Rearden. He’ll sign.” 

By the rules of their unspoken language, they all knew — from the 
tone of his voice — that he was not bluffing. 

“God, Jim! No!” gasped Wesley Mouch. 

“Yes,” said Taggart. “I was stunned, too, when I learned — what 
I learned. I didn't expect that. Anything but that.” 

“I am glad to hear it,” said Mouch cautiously. “It’s a constructive 
piece of information. It might be very valuable indeed.” t 

“Valuable — yes,” said Taggart pleasantly. “When do yoki plan to 
put the directive into effect?” 

“Oh, we have to move fast. We don't want any news orit to leak 
out. I expect you all to keep this most strictly confidential. I’d say 
that we’ll be ready to spring it on them in a couple of w^eks.” 

“Don’t you think it would be — advisable — before all prices are 

506 



frozen — to adjust the matter of the railroad rates? I was thinking of 
a raise. A small but most essentially needed raise.” 

“We’ll discuss it, you and l,” said Mouch amiably. “It might be 
arranged.” He turned to the others; Boyle’s face was sagging. “There 
are many details still to be worked out, but I’m sure that our pro- 
gram won’t encounter any major difficulties. ’ He was assuming the 
tone and manner of a public address; he sounded brisk and almost 
cheerful. “Rough spots are to be expected. If one thing doesn’t work, 
we’ll try another. Trial-and-error is the only pragmatic rule of action. 
We’ll just keep on trying. Jf any hardships come up. remember that 
it’s only temporary. Only for the duration of the national emer- 
gency.’’ 

“Say,” asked Kinnan. “how is the emergency to end if everything 
is to stand still?” 

“Don’t be theoretical,” said Mouch impatiently. “We've got to 
deal with the situation of the moment. Don't bother about minor 
details, so long as the broad outlines of our policy are clear. We’ll 
have the power We’ll be able to solve any problem and answer 
any question.” 

Fred Kinnan chuckled. “Who is John Galt?” 

“Don’t say that!” cried Taggart. 

“1 have a question to ask about Point Seven,” said Kinnan. “It 
says that all wages, prices, salaries, dividends, profits and so forth 
will be frozen on the date of the directive. Taxes, too?” 

“Oh no!” cried Mouch. “How can wc tell what funds we ll need in 
the future?” Kinnan seemed to be smiling. “Well?” snapped Mouch. 
“What about it?” 

“Nothing,” said Kinnan. “I just asked.” 

Mouch leaned back in his chair. “I must say to all of you that I 
appreciate your coming here and giving us the benefit of your opin- 
ions. It has been very helpful.” He leaned forward to look at his 
desk calendar and sat over it for a moment, toying with his pencil. 
1 hen the pencil came down, struck a date and drew a circle around 
it “Directive 10-289 will go into effect on the morning of May first.” 

All nodded approval. None looked at his neighbor. 

James Taggart rose, walked to the window and pulled the blind 
down over the white obelisk, 

♦ * 

In the first moment of awakening. Dagny was astonished to find 
herself looking at the spires of unfamiliar buildings against a glowing, 
pale blue sky. Then she saw the twisted scam of the thin stocking 
on her own leg, she felt a wrench of discomfort in the muscles of 
her waistline, and she realized that she was lying on the couch in 
her office, with the clock on her desk saying 6:15 and the first rays 
of the sun giving silver edges to the silhouettes of the skyscrapers 
beyond the window. The last thing she remembered was that she 
had dropped down on the couch, intending to rest for ten minutes, 
when the window was black and the clock stood at 3:30. 

She twisted herself to her feet, feeling an enormous exhaustion. 
1 he lighted lamp on the desk looked futile in the glow of the morn- 
ing, over the piles of paper which were her cheerless, unfinished task. 

507 



She tried not to think of the work for a few minutes longer, while 
she dragged herself past the desk to her washroom and let handfuls 
of cold water run over her face. 

The exhaustion was gone by the time she stepped back into the 
office. No matter what night preceded it, she had never known a 
morning when she did not feci the rise of a quiet excitement that 
became a tightening energy in her body and a hunger for action in 
her mind — because this was the beginning of day and it was a day 
of her life. She looked down at the city. The streets were still empty, 
it made them look wider, and in the luminous cleanliness of the 
spring air they seemed to be waiting for the promise of all the great* 
ness that would take form in the activity about to pour through 
them. The calendar m the distance said: May 1. 

She sat down at her desk, smiling in defiance at the distastefulness 
of her job. She hated the reports that she had to finish reading, but 
it was her job, it was her railroad, it was morning. She lighted a 
cigarette, thinking that she would finish this task before breakfast; 
she turned off the lamp and pulled the papers forward. 

There were reports from the general managers of the tour Regions 
of the Taggart system, their pages a typewritten cry of despair over 
the breakdowns of equipment. There was a report about a wreck on 
the main line near Winston, Colorado. There was the new budget 
of the Operating Department, the revised budget based on the raise 
in rates which Jim had obtained last week. She tried to choke the 
exasperation of hopelessness as she went slowly over the budget's 
figures; all those calculations had been made on the assumption that 
the volume of freight would remain unchanged and that the raise 
would bring them added revenue by the end of the year; she knew 
that the freight tonnage would go on shrinking, that the raise would 
make little difference, that by the end of this year their losses would 
be greater than ever. 

When she looked up from the pages, she saw with a small jolt of 
astonishment that the clock said 9:25. She had been dimly aware of 
the usual sound of movement and voices in the anteroom of her 
office, as her staff had arrived to begin their day; she wondered why 
nobody had entered her office and why her telephone had remained 
silent; as a daily rule, there should have been a rush of business by 
this hour. She glanced at her calendar; there was a note that the 
McNeil Car Foundry of Chicago was to phone her at nine am in 
regard to the new freight cars which Taggart Transcontinental had 
been expecting for six months. 

She flicked the switch of the interoffice communicator fo call her 
secretary. The girl's voice answered with a startled little glisp: “Miss 
Taggart! Are you here, in your office?” s 

“f slept here last night, again. Didn’t intend to, but did. fWas there 
a call for me from the McNeil Car Foundry?” 

“No, Miss Taggart.” 

“Put them through to me immediately, when they call. 

“Yes, Miss Taggart.” 

Switching the communicator off, she wondered whethef she imag- 

508 



incd it or whether there had been something strange in the girl’s 
voice: it had sounded unnaturally tense. 

She felt the faint light-headedness of hunger and thought that she 
should go down to get a cup of coffee, but there was still the report 
of the chief engineer to finish, so she lighted one more cigarette, 

.The chief engineer was out on the road, supervising the reconstruc- 
tion of the main track with the Rearden Metal rail taken from the 
corpse at the John Galt Line; she had chosen the sections most 
urgently in need of repair. Opening his report, she read — with a 
shock of incredulous anger — that he had stopped woTk in the moun- 
tain section of Winston, Colorado. He recommended a change of 
plans: he suggested that the rail intended for Winston be used, in- 
stead, to repair the track of their Washington-to-Miami branch. He 
gave his reasons: a derailment had occurred on that branch last week, 
and Mr. Tmky Holloway of Washington, I raveling with a party of 
friends, had been delayed for three hours; it had been reported to the 
chief engineer that Mr. Holloway had expressed extreme displeasure. 
Although, from a purely technological viewpoint- -.said the chief en- 
gineer’s report — the rail of the Miami branch was in better condition 
than that of the Winston section, one had to remember, from a 
sociological viewpoint, that the Miami branch earned a much more 
important class of passenger traffic; therefore, the chief engineer sug- 
gested that Winston could be kept waiting a little longer, and recom- 
mended the sacrifice of an obscure section of mountain trackage for 
the sake of a branch where "Taggart Transcontinental could not 
afford to cicate an unfavorable impression.” 

She read, slashing lutious pencil marks on the margins of the 
pages, thinking that her first duty of the day, ahead of any other, 
was to slop this particular piece of insanity 

The telephone rang. 

"Yes?” she asked, snatching the receiver. “McNeil C ar Foundry?” 

“No," said the voice of her secretary. “Seilor Francisco d Anconia.” 

She looked at the phone’s mouthpiece for the instant ot a brief 
shock, “All right. Put him on ” 

'The next voice she heard was Francisco’s. “J see that you're in 
your office just the same," he said; his voice was mocking, harsh 
and tense. 

“Where did you expect me to be?” 

“How do you like the new suspension?” 

“What suspension?” 

“The moratorium on brains.” 

“What aie you talking about?" 

“Haven’t you seen today’s newspapers?” 

“No.” 

I here was a pause; then his voice came slowly, changed and grave: 
"better take a look at them, Dagny.” 

."All right.” 

‘i’ll call you later.” 

She hung up and pressed the switch of the communicator on her 
desk. “Get me a newspaper,” she said to her secretary' 

509 



u Yes, Miss Taggart/ 1 the secretary's voice answered grimly. 

It was Eddie Willers who came in and put the newspaper down 
on her desk. The meaning of the look on his face was the same as 
the tone she had caught in Francisco’s voice: the advance notice of 
some inconceivable disaster. 

“None of us wanted to be first to tell you/’ he said very quietly 
and walked out. 

When she rose from her desk, a few moments later, she felt that 
she had full control of her body and that she was not aware of her 
body’s existence. She felt lifted to her feet and it seemed to her that 
she stood straight, not touching the ground. There was an abnormal 
clarity about every object in the room: yet she was seeing nothing 
around her, but she knew that she would be able to see the thread 
of a cobweb if her purpose required it, just as she would be able to 
walk with a somnambulist’s assurance along the edge of a roof. She 
could not know that she was looking at the room with the eyes of 
a person who had lost the capacity and the concept of doubt, and 
what remained to her was the simplicity of a single perception and 
of a single goal. She did not know that the thing which seemed so 
violent, yet felt like such a still, unfamiliar calm within her, was the 
power of full certainty — and that the anger shaking her body, the 
anger which made her ready, with the same passionate indifference, 
either to kill or to die, was her love of rectitude, the only love to 
which all the years of her life had been given. 

Holding the newspaper in her hand, she walked out of her office 
and on toward the hall. She knew, crossing the anteroom, that the 
faces of her staff were turned to her, but they seemed to be many 
years away. 

She walked down the hall, moving swiftly but without effort, with 
the same sensation of knowing that her feet were probably touching 
the ground but that she did not feel it. She did not know how many 
rooms she crossed to reach Jim’s office, or whether there had been 
any people in her way, she knew the direction to take and the door 
to pull open to enter unannounced and walk toward his desk. 

The newspaper was twisted into a roll by the time she stood before 
him. She threw it at his face, it struck his cheek and fell down to 
the carpet. 

“There’s my resignation, Jim,” she said. "I won’t work as a slave 
or as a slave-driver.” 

She did not hear the sound of his gasp; it came with the sound of 
the door dosing after her. 

She went back to her office and, crossing the anteroom, signaled 
Eddie to follow her inside. 

She said, her voice calm and clear, “I have resigned.” 

He nodded silently, 

“1 don’t know as yet jvhat I’ll do in the future. I’m going away, 
to think it over and to dedde. If you want to follow me,| I’ll be at 
the lodge in Woodstock.” It was an old hunting cabin in a forest of 
the Berkshire Mountains, which she had inherited from her father 
and had not visited for years. 


510 



“I want to follow/’ he whispered, “I want to quit, and . . . and 1 
can’t. I can’t make myself do it.” 

“Then will you do me a favor?” 

“Of course.” 

“Don’t communicate with me about the railroad. 1 don’t want to 
hear it. Don’t tell anyone where l am, except Hank Rcarden. If he 
asks, tell him about the cabin and how to get there. But no one else, 

1 don’t want to see anybody.” 

“All right.” 

“Promise?” 

“Of course.” 

“When I decide what’s to become of me. I’ll let you know.” 

“Pll wait.” 

“That’s all Eddie.” 

He knew that every word was measured and that nothing else 
could be said between them at this moment. He inclined his head, 
letting it say the rest, then walked out of the office. 

She saw the chief engineer’s report still lying open on her desk, 
and thought that she had to order him at once to resume work on 
the Winston section, then remembered that it was not her problem 
any longer. She felt no pain. She knew that the pain would come 
later and that it would be a tearing agony of pain, and that the 
numbness of this moment was a rest granted to her, not after, but 
before, to make her ready to bear it. But it did not matter. If that 
is required of me, then I'll bear it — she thought. 

She sat down at her desk and telephoned Rearden at his mills 
in Pennsylvania. 

“Hello, dearest,” he said. He said it simply and clearly, as if he 
wanted to say it because it was real and right, and he needed to 
hold on to the concepts of reality and rightness. 

“Hank. I’ve quit.” 

“I see.” He sounded as if he had expected it. 

“Nobody came to get me, no destroyer, perhaps there never was 
any destroyer, after all. 1 don’t know what I'll do next, but I have 
to got away, so that 1 won’t have to see any of them for a while. 
Then I'll decide. I know that you can't go with me right now.” 

“No. 1 have two weeks in which they expect me to sign their Gift 
Certificate. I want to be right here when the two weeks expire.” 

“Do you need me — for the two weeks?” 

“No. It s worse for you than for me. You have no way to fight 
them. I have. I think I’m glad they did it. It’s clear and final. Don't 
worry about me. Rest. Rest from all of it, first.” 

“Yes.” 

“Where are you going?” 

“To the country. To a cabin l own in the Berkshires. If you want 
U> see me, Eddie Willers will tell you the way to get there. Til be 
hack in two weeks.” 

* “Will you do me a favor?” 

“Yes.” 

“Don't come back until I come for you.” 

“But I want to be here, when it happens.” 

511 



“Leave that up to me/* 

“Whatever they do to you, I want it done to me also/* 

“Leave it up to me. Dearest, don't you understand? I think that 
what I want most right now is what you want; not to see any of 
them. But I have to stay here for a while. So it will help me if 1 
know that you, at least, are out of their reach. I want to keep one 
dean point in my mind, to lean against. It will be only a short while — 
and then I’ll come for you. Do you understand?” 

“Yes, my darling. So long.” 

It was weightlessly easy to walk out of her office and down the 
stretching halls of Taggart Transcontinental. She walked, looking 
ahead, her steps advancing with the unbroken, unhurried rhythm of 
finality. Her face was held level and it had a look of astonishment, 
of acceptance, of repose. 

She walked across the concourse of the Terminal. She saw the 
statue of Nathaniel Taggart. But she felt no pain from it and no 
reproach, only the rising fullness of her love, only the feeling that 
she was going to join him, not in death, but in that which had been 
his life. 

* * 

The first man to quit at Rearden Steel was Tom Colby, rolling 
mill foreman, head of the Rearden Steel Workers Union. For ten 
years, he had heard himself denounced throughout the country, be- 
cause his was a “company union” and because he had never engaged 
in a violent conflict with the management. TTiis was true: no conflict 
had ever been necessary; Rearden paid a higher wage scale than any 
union scale in the country, for which he demanded — and got — the 
best labor force to be found anywhere. 

When Tom Colby told him that he was quitting. Rearden nodded, 
without comment or questions. 

“I won’t work under these conditions, myself,” Colby added qui- 
etly, “and l won’t help to keep the men working. They trust me. I 
won’t be the Judas goat leading them to the stockyards.” 

“What are you going to do for a living?” asked Rearden. 

“I’ve saved enough to last me for about a year.” 

“And after that?” 

Colby shrugged. 

Rearden thought of the boy with the angry eyes, who mined coal 
at night as a criminal. He thought of all the dark roads, the alleys, 
the back yards of the country, where the best of the country’s men 
would now exchange their services in jungle barter, in chance jobs, 
in unrecorded transactions. He thought of the end of that road. 

Tom Colby seemed to know what he was thinking. “You’re on 
your way to end up right alongside of me, Mr Rearden^’ he said. 
“Are you going to sign your brains over to them?” 

“No.” 

“And after that?” 

Rearden shrugged. 

Colby’s eyes watched him for a moment, pale, shrewdi eyes in a 
furnace-tanned face with soot-engraved wrinkles. “They’vi been tell- 

512 



ing us for years that it’s you against me, Mr. Rearden. But it isn't. 
It’s Orren Boyle and Fred Kinnan against you and me.” 

“I know it.” 

The Wet Nurse had never entered Rearden’s office, as if sensing 
that that was a place he had no right to enter. He always waited to 
catch a glimpse of Rearden outside. The directive had attached him 
to his job, as the mills* official watchdog of over-or-underproduction. 
He stopped Rearden, a few days later, in an alley between the rows 
of open-hearth furnaces. There was an odd look of fierceness on the 
boy’s face. 

“Mr. Rearden,” he said, “I wanted to tell you that if you want to 
pour ten times the quota of Rearden Metal or steel or pig iron or 
anything, and bootleg it all over the place to anybody at any price — 
I wanted to tel! you to go ahead. I’ll fix it up. I’ll juggle the books. 
I’ll fake the reports. I’ll get phony witnesses. I’ll forge affidavits. I’ll 
commit peijury — so you don’t have to worry, there won’t be any 
trouble!” 

“Now why do you want to do that?” asked Rearden, smiling, but 
his smile vanished when he heard the boy answer earnestly: 

“Because 1 want, for once, to do something moral.” 

“That’s not the way to be moral — ” Rearden started, and stopped 
abruptly, realizing that it was the way, the only way left, realizing 
through how many twists of intellectual corruption upon corruption 
this boy had to struggle toward his momentous discovery. 

“I guess that’s not the word,” the boy said sheepishly. “1 know 
it’s a stuffy, old-fashioned word: That's not what I meant. I meant — ” 
It was a sudden, desperate cry of incredulous anger: “Mr. Rearden, 
they have no right to do it!” 

“What?” 

“Take Rearden Meta! away from you.” 

Rearden smiled and, prompted by a desperate pity, said, “Forget 
it, Non-Absolute. There are no rights.” 

“I know there aren’t. But I mean . . what 1 mean is that they 
can’t do it.” 

“Why not?” He could not help smiling. 

“Mr. Rearden, don’t sign the Gift Certificate! Don’t sign it, on 
principle.” 

“I won’t sign it. But there aren't any principles.” 

“1 know there aren’t.” He was reciting it in full earnestness, with 
the honesty of a conscientious student: “I know that everything is 
relative and that nobody can know anything and that reason is an 
illusion and that there isn’t any reality. But I’m just talking about 
Rearden Metal. Don’t sign, Mr. Rearden. Morals or no morals, prin- 
ciples or no principles, just don’t sign it — because it isn’t right!” 

No one else mentioned the directive in Rearden's presence. Si- 
lence was the new aspect about the mills. The men did not speak to 
him when he appeared in the workshops, and he noticed that they 
did not speak to one another, lire personnel office received no for- 
mal resignations. But every other morning, one or two men failed 
to appear and never appeared again. Inquiries at their homes found 
the homes abandoned and the men gone. The personnel office did 

513 



not report these desertions, as the directive required; instead. Rear- 
den began to see unfamiliar faces among the workers, the drawn, 
beaten faces of the long-unemployed, and heard them addressed by 
the names of the men who had quit. He asked no questions. 

There was silence throughout the country. He did not know how 
many industrialists had retired and vanished on May l and 2, leaving 
their plants to be seized. He counted ten among his own customers, 
including McNeil of the McNeil Car Foundry in Chicago. He had no 
way of learning about the others; no reports appeared in the newspa- 
pers. The front pages of the newspapers were suddenly full of stones 
about spnng floods, traffic accidents, school picnics and golden- 
wedding anniversaries. 

There was silence in his own home. Lillian had departed on a 
vacation trip to Florida, in mid-April; it had astonished him, as an 
inexplicable whim; it was the fiTst trip she had taken alone since 
their marriage. Philip avoided him, with a look of panic. His mother 
stared at Rearden in reproachful bewilderment; she said nothing, but 
she kept bursting into tears in his presence, her manner suggesting 
that her tears were the most impoitant aspect to consider in whatever 
disaster it was that she sensed approaching. 

Oft the morning of May 15, he sat at the desk in his office, above 
the spread of the mills, and watched the colors of the smoke rising 
to the clear, blue sky. Inhere were spurts of transparent smoke, like 
waves of heat, invisible but for the structures that shivered behind 
them; there were streaks of red smoke, and sluggish columns of 
yellow, and light, floating spirals of blue — and the thick, tight, swiftly 
pouring coils that looked like twisted bolts of satin tinged a mother- 
of-pearl pink by the summer sun. 

The buzzer rang on his desk, and Miss Ives’ voice said, “Dr. Floyd 
Ferris to see you, without appointment, Mr. Rearden.” Jn spite of 
its rigid formality, her tone conveyed the question- Shall I throw 
him out? 

There was a faint movement of astonishment in ReardeiTs face, 
barely above the line of indifference; he had not expected that partic- 
ular emissary. He answered evenly, “Ask him to come in.” 

Dr. Ferris did not smile as he walked toward Rearden’s desk; he 
merely wore a look suggesting that Rearden knew full well that he 
had good reason to smile and so he would abstain from the obvious. 

He sat down in front of the desk, not waiting for an invitation; he 
carried a briefcase, which he placed across his knees; he acted as if 
words were superfluous, since his reappearance in this office had 
made everything clear. 

Rearden sat watching him in patient silence. 

“Since the deadline for the signing of the national Gift Certificates 
expires tonight at midnight,” said Dr. Ferris, in the tone of a sales- 
man extending a special courtesy to a customer, “I have come to 
obtain your signature, Mr. Rearden.” ; 

He paused, with an air of suggesting that the formula no?w called 
for an answer. 

“Go on,” said Rearden. “I am listening.” % 

“Yes, I suppose I should explain,” said Dr. Ferris, “that^we wish 

514 



to get your signature early in the day in order to announce the fact 
on a national news broadcast. Although the gift program has gone 
through quite smoothly, there are still a few stubborn individualists 
left, who have failed to sign — small fry, really, whose patents arc of 
no crucial value, but we cannot let them remain unbound; as a matter 
of principle, you understand. They are, we believe, waiting to follow 
your lead. You have a great popular following, Mr. Rearden, much 
greater than you suspected or knew how to use. Therefore, the an- 
nouncement that you have signed will remove the last hopes of resis- 
tance and, by midnight, will bring in the last signatures, thus 
completing the program on schedule.” 

Rearden knew that of all possible speeches, this was the last Dr. 
Ferris would make if any doubt of his surrender remained in the 
man's mind. 

“Go on,” said Rearden evenly. “You haven’t Finished.” 

“You know — as you have demonstrated at your trial — how impor- 
tant it is. and why, that we obtain all that property with the voluntary 
consent of the victims.” Dr. Ferris opened his briefcase. “Here is 
the Gift Certificate, Mr. Rearden. We have filled it out and all you 
have to do is to sign your name at the bottom.” 

The piece of paper, which he placed in front of Rearden, looked 
like a small college diploma, with the text printed in old-tashioned 
script and the particulars inserted by typewriter. The thing stated 
that he, Henry Rearden, hereby transferred to the nation all rights 
to the metal alloy now known as “Rearden Metal,” which would 
henceforth be manufactured by all who so desired, and which would 
bear the name of “Miracle Metal,” chosen by the representatives of 
the people. Glancing at the paper, Rearden wondered whether it 
was a deliberate mockery of decency, or so low an estimate of their 
victims’ intelligence, that had made the designers of this paper print 
the text across a faint drawing of the Statue of Liberty. 

His eyes moved slowly to Dr. Ferris’ face. “You would not have 
come here.” he said, “unless you had some extraordinary kind of 
blackjack to use on me. What is it?” 

“Of course,” said Dr. Ferris. “I would expect you to understand 
that. That is why no lengthy explanations are necessary.” He opened 
his briefcase. “Do you wish to see my blackjack? I have brought a 
few samples.” 

In the manner of a cardsharp whisking out a long fan of cards 
with one snap of the hand, he spread before Rearden a line of glossy 
photographic prints. They were photostats of hotel and auto court 
registers, bearing in Reardcn’s handwriting the names of Mr. and 
Mrs. J. Smith. 

“You know, of course,” said Dr. Ferris softly, “but you might wish 
to see whether we know it, that Mrs. J. Smith is Miss Dagny 
Taggart.” 

He found nothing to observe in Rearden ’s face. Rearden had not 
moved to bend over the prints, but sat looking down at them with 
grave attentiveness, as if, from the perspective of distance, he were 
discovering something about them which he had not known. 

“We have a great deal of additional evidence,” said Dr. Ferris, 

515 



and tossed down on the desk a photostat of the jeweler's bill for the 
ruby pendant. “You wouldn't care to see the sworn statements of 
apartment-house doormen and night clerks — they contain nothing 
that would be new to you, except the number of witnesses who know 
where you spent your nights in New York tor about the last two 
years. You mustn't blame those people too much. It’s an interesting 
characteristic of epochs such as ours that people begin to be afraid 
of saying the things they want to say — and afraid, when questioned, 
to remain silent about things they'd prefer never to utter. That is to 
be expected. But you would be astonished if you knew who gave us 
the original tip.” 

“1 know it,” said Rearden, his voice conveyed no reaction. The 
trip to Florida was not inexplicable to him any longer. 

“There is nothing m this blackjack of mine that can harm you 
personally,” said Dr. Ferris. “We knew that no form of personal 
injury would ever make you give in. Therefore. I am telling you 
frankly that this will not hurt you at all. It will only hurt Miss 
Taggart.” 

Rearden was looking straight at him now, but Dr. Ferns wondered 
why it seemed to him that the calm, closed face was moving away 
into a greater and greater distance. 

"If this affair of yours is spread from one end of the country to 
the other,” said Dr. Ferris, “by such experts in the art of smearing 
as Bertram Scudder, it will do no actual damage to your reputation. 
Beyond a few glances ot curiosity and a few raised eyebrows in a 
few of the stuffier drawing rooms, you will get off quite easily. Affairs 
of this sort arc expected of a man. In fact, it will enhance your 
reputation. It will give you an aura of romantic glamour among the 
women and, among the men. it will give you a certain kind of pics- 
tige, in the nature of envy for an unusual conquest. But what it will 
do to Miss Taggart — with her spotless name, her reput at ion for being 
above scandal, her peculiar position of a woman in a strictly mascu- 
line business — what it will do to her, what she will sec m the eyes 
of everyone sfve meets, what she will hear from every man she deals 
with — 1 will leave that up to youi own mind to imagine. And to 
consider.” 

Rearden felt nothing but a great stillness and a great clarity It 
was as if some voice were telling him sternly: This «s the nine— the 
scene is lighted — now look. And standing naked in the great light; 
he was looking quietly, solemnly, stripped of fear, of pain, of hope, 
with nothing left to him but the desire to know. 

Dr. Ferris was astonished to hear him say slowly, in the dispassion- 
ate tone of an abstract statement that did not seem to be addressed 
to his listener, "But all your calculations rest on the fact that Miss 
Taggart is a virtuous woman, not the slut you’re going to call her.” 

“Yes, of course,” said Dr. Ferris. 

“And that this means much more to me than a casual affair.” 

“Of course.” 

“If she and I were the kind of scum you're going to jmakc us 
appear, your blackjack wouldn't work*” 

“No, it wouldn't.” 


516 



“If our relationship were the depravity you’re going to proclaim 
it to be, you’d have no way to harm us.” 

“No.” 

“We’d be outside your power.” 

“Actually— yes.” 

It was not to Dr. Ferris that Rearden was speaking. He was seeing 
a long line of men stretched through the centuries from Plato on- 
ward, whose heir and final product was an incompetent little profes- 
sor with the appearance of a gigolo and the soul of a thug. 

“I offered you, once, a chance to join ns,” said Dr. Ferris. “You 
refused. Now you can see the consequences. How a man of your 
intelligence thought that he could win by playing it straight, l can’t 
imagine.” 

“But if 1 had joined you,” said Rearden, with the same detach- 
ment, as if he were not speaking about himself, “what would I have 
found worth looting from Orren Boyle?” 

“Oh hell, there's always enough suckers to expropriate in the 
world!” 

“Such as Miss Taggart? As Ken Danagger? As F.llis Wyatt? As I?” 

“Such as any man who wants to be impractical ” 

“You mean that u is not practical to live on earth, is it?” 

He did not know whether Dr. Ferris answered him. He was not 
listening any longer. He was seeing the pendulous face of Orren 
Boyle with the small slits of pig’s eyes, the doughy face of Mr. 
Mowen with the eyes that scurried away from any speaker and any 
fact— he was seeing them go through the jerky motions of an ape 
performing a routine it had learned to copy by muscular habit, per- 
forming it in order to manufacture Rearden Metal, with no knowl- 
edge and no capacity to know what had taken place in the 
experimental laboratory of Rearden Steel through ten years of pas- 
sionate devotion to an excruciating effort. It was proper that they 
should now call it “Miracle Metal”- -a miracle was the only name 
they could give to those ten years and to that faculty from which 
Rearden Metal was born —a miracle was all that the Metal could be 
in their eyes, the product of an unknown, unknowable cause, an 
object in nature, not to be explained, but to be seized, like a stone 
or a weed, theirs for the seizing— “are we to let the many remain 
in want while the few withhold from us the better products and 
methods available?” 

If I had not known that my life depends on my mind and my 
effort — he was saying soundlessly to the line of men stretched 
through the centuries — if 1 had not made it my highest moral purpose 
to exercise the best of my effort and the fullest capacity of my mind 
in order to support and expand my life, you would have found noth- 
ing to loot from me, nothing to support your own existence: It is not 
my sins that you're using to injure me, but my virtues — my virtues 
by your own acknowledgment, since your own life depends on them, 
since you need them, since you do not seek to destroy my achieve- 
ment but to seize it. 

He remembered the voice of the gigolo of science saying to him: 
“We’re after power and we mean it. You fellows were pikers, but 

517 



we know the real trick.” We were not after power — he said to the 
gigolo's ancestors-in-spirit — and we did not live by means of that 
which we condemned. We regarded productive ability as virtue — and 
we let the degree of his virtue be the measure of a man’s reward. 
We drew no advantage from the things we regarded as evil — we did 
not require the existence of bank robbers in order to operate our 
banks, or of burglars in order to provide for our homes, or of mur- 
derers in order to protect our lives. But you need the products of a 
man's ability — yet you proclaim that productive ability is a sellish 
evil and you turn the degree of a man’s productiveness into the 
measure of his loss. We lived by that which we held to be good and 
punished that which we held to be evil. You live by that which you 
denounce as evil and punish that which you know to be good. 

He remembered the formula of the punishment that Lillian had 
sought to impose on him, the formula he had considered too mon- 
strous to believe — and he saw it now in its full application, as a 
system of thought, as a way of life and on a world scale. There it 
was: the punishment that required the victim's own virtue as the fuel 
to make it work — his invention of Rearden Metal being used as the 
cause of his expropriation— -Dagny’s honor and the depth of their 
feeling for each other being used as a tool of blackmail, a blackmail 
from which the depraved would be immune — and, in the People's 
States of Europe, millions of men being held in bondage by means 
of their desire to live, by means of their energy drained m forced 
labor, by means of their ability to feed their masters, by means of 
the hostage system, of their love for their children or wives or 
friends — by means of love, ability and pleasure as the fodder for 
threats and the bait for extortion, with love tied to fear, ability to 
punishment, ambition to confiscation, with blackmail as law, with 
escape from pain, not quest for pleasure, as the only incentive to 
effort and the only reward of achievement — men held enslaved by 
means of whatever living power they possessed and of whatever joy 
they found in life. Such was the code that the world had accepted 
and such was the key to the code: that it hooked man’s love of 
existence to a circuit of torture, so that only the man who had noth- 
ing to offer would have nothing to fear, so that the virtues which 
made life possible and the values which gave it meaning became the 
agents of its destruction, so that one’s best became the tool of one’s 
agony, and man’s life on earth became impractical. 

“Yours was the code of life,” said the voice of a man whom he 
could not forget. “What, then, is theirs?” 

Why had the world accepted it? — he thought. How had the victims 
come to sanction a code that pronounced them guilty of the fact of 
existing? . . , And then the violence of an inner blow* became the 
total stillness of his body as he sat looking at a sudden vfsion: Hadn't 
he done it also? Hadn’t he given his sanction to the Code of self- 
damnation? Dagny — he thought— and the depth of thefr feeling for 
each other . . . the blackmail from which the depraved would be 
immune , . . hadn’t he, too, once called it depravity? Hadn’t he been 
first to throw at her all the insults which the human scum was now 

518 



threatening to throw at her in public? Hadn't he accepted as guilt 
the highest happiness he had ever found? 

“You who won’t allow one per cent of impurity into an alloy of 
metal,” the unforgotten voice was saying to him, “what have you 
allowed into your moral code?” 

“Well, Mr. Rearden?” said the voice of Dr. Ferris. “Do you under- 
stand me now? Do we get the Metal or do we make a public show- 
place out of Miss Taggart’s bedroom?” 

He was not seeing Dr. Ferris. He was seeing — in the violent clarity 
that was like a spotlight tearing every riddle open to him — the day 
he met Dagny for the first time. 

It was a few months after she had become Vice-President of Tag- 
gart Transcontinental. He had been hearing skeptically, for some 
time, the rumors that the railroad was run by Jim Taggart’s sister. 
That summer, when he grew exasperated at Taggart’s delays and 
contradictions over an order of rail for a new cutoff, an order which 
Taggart kept placing, altering and withdrawing, somebody told him 
that if he wished to get any sense or action out of Taggart Transcon- 
tinental, he’d better speak to Jim’s sister. He telephoned her office 
to make an appointment and insisted on having it that same after- 
noon. Her secretary told him that Miss Taggart would be at the 
construction site of the new cutoff, that afternoon, at Milford Station 
between New York and Philadelphia, but would be glad to see him 
there if he wished. He went to the appointment resentfully; he did 
not like such businesswomen as he had met, and he felt that railroads 
were no business for a woman to play with; he expected a spoiled 
heiress who used her name and sex as substitute for ability, some 
eyebrow-plucked, overgroomed female, like the lady executives of 
department stores. 

He got off the last car of a long train, far beyond the platform of 
Milford Station: There was a clutter of sidings, freight cars, cranes 
and steam shovels around him, descending from the main track down 
the slope of a ravine where men were grading the roadbed of the 
new cutoff. He started walking between the sidings toward the sta- 
tion building. Then he stopped. 

He saw a girl standing on top of a pile of machinery on a flatcar. 
She was looking off at the ravine, her head lifted, strands of disor- 
dered hair stirring in the wind. Her plain gray suit was like a thin 
coating of metal over a slender body against the spread of sunflooded 
space and sky. Her posture had the lightness and unself-conscious 
precision of an arrogantly pure self-confidence. She was watching the 
work, her glance intent and purposeful, the glance of competence 
enjoying its own function. She looked as if this were her place, her 
moment and her world, she looked as if enjoyment were her natural 
state, her face was the living form of an active, living intelligence, a 
young girl’s face with a woman’s mouth, she seemed unaware of her 
body except as of a taut instrument ready to serve her purpose in 
any manner she wished. 

Had he asked himself a moment earlier whether he carried in his 
mind an image of what he wanted a woman to look like, he would 
have answered that he did hot; yet, seeing her, he knew that this 

519 



was the image and that it had been for years. But he was not looking 
at her as at a woman. He had forgotten where he was and on what 
errand, he was held by a child’s sensation of joy in the immediate 
moment, by the delight of the unexpected and undiscovered, he was 
held by the astonishment ot realizing how seldom he came upon a 
sight he truly liked, liked in complete acceptance and for its own 
sake, he was looking up at her with a faint smile, as he would have 
looked at a statue or a landscape, and what he felt was the sheer 
pleasure of the sight, the purest esthetic pleasure he had ever 
experienced. 

He saw a switchman going by and he asked, pointing, “Who is 
that?’* 

“Oagny Taggart.” said the man, walking on. 

Rearden felt as if the words struck him inside his throat. He fell 
the start of a current that cut his breath for a moment, then went 
slowly down his body, carrying m its wake a sense of weight, a 
drained heaviness that left him no capacity but one. He was aware - - 
with an abnormal clarity —of the place, the woman’s name, and ev- 
erything it implied, but all of it had receded into some outer ring 
and had become a pressure that left him alone in the center, as the 
ring’s meaning and essence— and his only reality was the desire to 
have this woman, now, here, on top of the flatcar in the open sun — 
to have her before a word was spoken between them, as the first act 
of their meeting, because it would say everything and because they 
had earned it long ago. 

She turned her head. In the slow curve of the movement, her eyes 
came to his and stopped. He felt certain that she saw the nature of 
his glance, that she was held by it, yet did not name it to herself. 
Her eyes moved on and be saw her speak to some man who stood 
beside the flatcar, taking notes. 

Two things struck him together: his return to his normal reality, 
and the shattering impact of guilt. He felt a moment’s approach to 
that which no man may feel fully and survive: a sense of self hatred- 
the more terrible because some part of him refused to accept it and 
made him feel guiltier, it was not a progression of words, but the 
instantaneous verdict of an emotion, a verdict that told him: This, 
then, was his nature, this was his depravity — that the shameful desire 
he had never been able to conquer, came to him in response to the 
only sight of beauty he had found, that it came with a violence he 
had not known to be possible, and that the only freedom now left 
to him was to hide it, and to despise himself, but never to be rid of 
it so long as he and this woman were alive. 

He did not know how long he stood there or what devastation 
that span of time left within him. All that he could prescivq was the 
will to decide that she must never know it. 

He waited until she had descended to the ground and jlhe man 
with the notes had departed; then he approached her and sajd coldly: 

“Miss Taggart? 1 am Henry Rcardcn.” 

“Ohl” It was just a small break, then he heard the quietly natural 
“How do you do, Mr. Rearden.” 

He knew, not admitting it to himself, that the break cajme from 

520 



some faint equivalent of his own feeling: she was glad that a face 
she had liked belonged to a man she could admire. When he pro- 
ceeded to speak to her about business, his manner was more harshly 
abrupt than it had ever been with any of his masculine customers. 

Now, looking from the memory of the girl on the flatcar to the 
Gift Certificate lying on his desk, he felt as if the two met in a single 
shock, fusing all the days and doubts he had lived between them, 
and, by the glare of the explosion, in a moment’s vision of a final 
sum, he saw the answer to all his questions. 

He thought: Guilty? — guiltier than f had known, far guiltier than 
1 had thought, that day - guilty of the evil of damning as guilt that 
which was my best. I damned the fact that my mind and body were 
a unit, and that my body responded to the values of my mind. I 
damned the fact that joy is the core of existence, the motive power 
of cveiy living being, that it is the need of one's body as it is the 
goal of one’s spirit, that my body was not a weight of inanimate 
muscles, but an instrument able to give me an experience of superla- 
tive joy to unite my flesh and my spirit. That capacity, which 1 
damned as shameful, had left me indilfeient to sluts, but gave me 
my one desire in answer to a woman’s greatness. That desire, which 
I damned as obscene, did not come from the sight of her body, but 
from the knowledge that I he lovely f orm 1 saw did express the spirit 
1 was seeing” it was not her body that 1 wanted, but her person— it 
was not the girl in gray that I had to possess, but the woman who 
ran a rail toad 

But 1 damned my body’s capacity to express what T felt, 1 damned, 
as an affront to her, the highest tubule 1 could give her just as they 
damn my ability to translate the work ot my mind into Reardon 
Metal, just as they damn me for the power to transform matter to 
serve my needs l accepted their code and believed, as they taught 
me, that the values of one’s spirit must remain as an impotent long- 
ing, unexpressed in action, untranslated into reality, while the life of 
one’s body must be lived in misery, as a senseless, degrading perfor- 
mance, and those who attempt to enjoy it must be branded as infe- 
rior animals. 

1 broke their code, but I tell into the trap they intended, the trap 
of a code devised to be broken. 1 took no pride in my rebellion, l 
took it as guilt, l did not damn them, I damned myself, I did not 
damn their axle. I damned existence — and I hid my happiness as a 
shameful secret. I should have lived it openly, as of our right — or 
made her my wife, as in truth she was. But I branded my happiness 
as evil and made her bear it as a disgrace. What they want to do to 
her now, 1 did it first, I made it possible. 

I did it- -in the name of pity for the most contemptible woman I 
know. That, too, was their code, and I accepted it. i believed that 
one person owes a duty to another with no payment for it in return. 
1 believed that it was my duty to love a woman who gave me nothing, 
who betrayed everything 1 lived for, who demanded her happiness 
at the price of mine. [ believed that love is some static gift which, 
once granted, need no longer be deserved— just as they believe that 
wealth is a static possesion which can be seized and held without 

521 



further effort. I believed that love is a gratuity, not a reward to be 
earned just as they believe it is their right to demand an unearned 
wealth. And just as they believe that their need is a claim on my 
energy, so I believed that her unhappiness was a claim on my life. 
For the sake of pity, not justice, I endured ten years of self-torture. 
I placed pity above my own conscience, and this is the core of my 
guilt. My crime was committed when I said to her, “By every stan- 
dard of mine, to maintain our marriage will be a vicious fraud. But 
my standards are not yours. I do not understand yours, I never have, 
but 1 will accept them.” 

Here they are, lying on my desk, those standards I accepted with- 
out understanding, here is the manner of her love for me, that love 
which I never believed, but tried to spare. Here is the final product 
of the unearned. I thought that it was proper to commit injustice, so 
long as I would be the only one to suffer. But nothing can justify 
injustice. And this is the punishment for accepting as proper that 
hideous evil which is self-immolation. I thought that I would be the 
only victim. Instead. I’ve sacrificed the noblest woman to the vilest. 
When one acts on pity against justice, it is the good whom one 
punishes for the sake of the evil; when one saves the guilty from 
suffering, it is the innocent whom one forces to suffer. There is no 
escape from justice, nothing can be unearned and unpaid for in the 
universe, neither in matter nor in spirit — and if the guilty do not 
pay, then the innocent have to pay it. 

It was not the cheap little looters of wealth who have beaten me — 
it was I. They did not disarm me — I threw away my weapon. This 
is a battle that cannot be fought except with clean hands — because 
the enemy’s sole power is in the sores of one’s conscience — and I 
accepted a code that made me regard the strength of my hands as 
a sin and a stain. 

“Do we get the Metal, Mr. Rearden?” 

He looked from the Gift Certificate on his desk to the memory 
of the girl on the flatcar. He asked himself whether he could deliver 
the radiant being he had seen in that moment, to the looters of the 
mind and the thugs of the press. Could he continue to let the inno- 
cent bear punishment? Could he let her take the stand he should 
have taken? Could he now defy the enemy’s code, when the disgrace 
would be hers, not his — when the muck would be thrown at her, not 
at him — when she would have to fight, while he’d be spared? Could 
he let her existence be turned into a hell he would have no way 
of sharing? 

He sat still, looking up at her. 1 love you, he said to the girl on 
the flatcar, silently pronouncing the words that had been the meaning 
of that moment four years ago, feeling the solemn happiness that 
belonged with the words, even though this was how he bad to say 
it to her for the first time. { 

He looked down at the Gift Certificate. Dagny, he thought, you 
would not let me do it if you knew, you will hate me fo < it if you 
learn — but I cannot let you pay my debts. The fault was Jmine and 
I will not shift to you the punishment which is mine to t*ke. Even 
if I have nothing else now left to me, 1 have this much: that 1 see 

522 



the truth, that 1 am free of their guilt, that I cum now stand guiltless 
in my own eyes, that 1 know 1 am right, right fully and for the first 
time — and that I will remain faithful to the one commandment of 
my code which I have never broken: to be a man who pays his 
own way. 

1 love you, he said to the girl on the flatcar, feeling as if the fight 
of that summer’s sun were touching his forehead, as if he, too, were 
standing under an open sky over an unobstructed earth, with nothing 
left to him except himself. 

“Well, Mr. Rearden? Are you going to sign?” asked Dr. Ferris. 

Rearden’s eyes moved to him. He had forgotten that Ferris was 
there, he did not know whether Ferris had been speaking, arguing 
or waiting in silence. 

“Oh, that?” said Rearden. 

He picked up a pen and with no second glance, with the easy 
gesture of a millionaire signing a check, he signed his name at the 
fool of the Statue of Liberty and pushed the Gift Certificate across 
the desk. 


Chapter VII THE MORATORIUM ON BRAINS 

“Where have you been all this time?” Eddie Willers asked the 
worker in the underground cafeteria, and added, with a smile that 
was an appeal, an apology and a confession of despair, “Oh, 1 know 
it s I whoVe stayed away from here for weeks.” The smile looked 
like the effort of a crippled child groping for a gesture that he could 
not perform any longer. ‘I did come here once, about two weeks 
ago, but you weren't here that night. I was afraid you'd gone . . so 
many people are vanishing without notice. I hear there’s hundreds 
of them roving around the country. The police have been arresting 
(hem tor leaving their jobs —they’re called deserters — but there's too 
many of them and no food to feed them in jail, so — nobody gives a 
damn any mote, one way or another. I heard the deserters are just 
wandering about, doing odd jobs or worse-— who's got any odd jobs 
to offer these days? . . It’s our best men that we're losing, the kind 
who’ve been with the company for twenty years or more. Why did 
they have to chain them to their jobs? T hose men never intended 
to quit — but now they’re quitting at the slightest disagreement, just 
dropping their tools and walking off, any hour of the day or night, 
leaving us in all sorts of jams — the men who used to leap out of bed 
and come running if the railroad needed them. . . . You should see 
the kind ot human driftwood we’re getting to fill the vacancies. Some 
of them mean well, but they’re scared of their own shadows. Others 
are the kind of scum I didn’t think existed — they get the jobs and 
they know that we can’t throw them out once they're in, so they 
make it clear that they don’t intend to work for their pay and never 
did intend. They’re the kind of men who tike it— who like the way 
things are now. Can you imagine that there are human beings who 
hke it? Well, there are. . . . You know. I don’t think that 1 really 
believe it — all that’s happening to us these days. It’s happening all 

523 



right, but I don't believe it. I keep thinking that insanity is a state 
where a person can't tell what’s real. Well, what's real now is in- 
sane — and if I accepted it as real, I’d have to lose my mind, wouldn’t 
I? ... 1 go on working and I keep telling myself that this is Taggart 
Transcontinental l keep waiting for her — to come back — for the 
door to open at any moment and— oh God, I’m not supposed to say 
that! . . . What? You knew it? You knew that she’s gone? . , . They’re 
keeping it secret. But I guess everybody knows it, only nobody is 
supposed to say it. They’re telling people that she’s away on a leave 
of absence. She’s still listed as our Vice-President in Charge of Oper- 
ation. 1 think Jim and I are the only ones who know that she has 
resigned for good. Jim is scared to death that his friends in Washing- 
ton will take it out on him. if it becomes known that she’s quit. It’s 
supposed to be disastrous for public morale, if any prominent person 
quits, and Jim doesn’t want them to know that he’s got a deserter 
right in his own family. . . But that’s not all. Jim is scared that the 

stockholders, the employees and whoever we do business with, will 
lose the last of their confidence in Taggart Transcontinental if they 
learn that she's gone. Confidence! You’d think that it wouldn’t mat- 
ter now, since there’s nothing any ot them can do about it. And yet 
Jim knows that we have to preserve some semblance of the greatness 
that Taggart Transcontinental once stood for. And he knows that 
the last of it went with her. . . . No. they don’t know' where she 
is. . . . Yes, I do. but I won't tell them I'm the only one who 
knows. . . . Oh, yes, they’ve been trying to find out. They've tried 
to pump me in every way they could think of, but it’s no use. I won’t 
tell anyone. . . You should see the trained seal that we now have 

in her place — our new Operating Vice-President Oh sure, we have 
one — that is. we have and we haven’t It’s like everything they do 
today — it is and it ain’t, at the same time. His name is Clitton 
Locey — he’s from Jim’s personal staff— a bright, progressive young 
man of forty-seven and a friend of Jim’s. He’s only supposed to be 
pinch-hitting for her, but he. sits in her office and we all know that 
that’s the new Operating Vice-President. He gives the orders — that 
is, he sees to it that he’s never caught actually giving an order. He 
works very hard at making sure that no decision can ever be pinned 
down on him, so that he won’t be blamed for anything. You see, hi* 
purpose is not to operate a railroad, but to hold a job. He doesn’t 
want to run trains — he wants to please Jim. He doesn’t give a damn 
whether there’s a single train moving or not, so long as he can make 
a good impression on Jim and on the boys in Washington. So far, 
Mr. Clifton Locey has managed to frame up two men: a young third 
assistant, for not relaying an order which Mr. Locey had never 
given — and the freight manager, for issuing an order which Mr, 
Locey did give, only the freight manager couldn’t prove if. Both men 
were fired, officially, by ruling of the Unification Board! . . . When 
things go well — which is never longer than half an hour-^-Mr. Locey 
makes it a point to remind us that ‘these arc not the days of Miss 
Taggart.’ At the first sign of trouble, he calls me into h& office and 
asks me — casually, in the midst of the most irrelevant drivel — what 
Miss Taggart used to do in such an emergency. I tell hini, whenever 

524 



1 can. 1 tell myself that it's Taggart Transcontinental, and . . . and 
there’s thousands of lives in dozens of trains that hang on our deci- 
sions. Between emergencies, Mr. Locey goes out of his way to be 
rude to me— that's so I wouldn’t think that he needs me. He’s made 
it a point to change everything she used to do, in every respect that 
doesn’t matter, hut he’s damn cautious not to change anything that 
matters. The only trouble is that he can t always tell which is 
which. ... On his first day in her office, he told me that it wasn’t a 
good idea to have a picture of Nat Taggart on the wall — ‘Nat Tag- 
gart,’ he said, ‘belongs to a dark past, to the age of selfish greed, he 
is not exactly a symbol of our modern, progressive policies, so it 
could make a bad impression, people could identify me with him,’ 
‘No, they couldn’t,* l said — but I took the picture off his wall. . . . 
What? . . . No. she doesn't know any of it. 1 haven’t communicated 
with her. Not once. She told me not to. . . . Last week, 1 almost 
quit. It was over Chick's Special. Mr. Chick Morrison of Washington, 
whoever the hell he is, has gone on a speaking tour of the whole 
country — to speak about the directive and build up the people’s mo- 
rale, as things arc getting to be pretty wild everywhere. He de- 
manded a special train, for himself and party— a sleeper, a parlor 
car and a diner with barroom and lounge. The Unification Board 
gave him permission to travel at a hundred miles an hour — by rea- 
son, the ruling said, of this being a non-profit journey. Well, so it is. 
It’s just a journey to talk people into continuing to break their backs 
at making profits in order to support men who are superior by reason 
of not making any. Well, our trouble came when Mr. Chick Morrison 
demanded a Diesel engine for his train. We had none to give him. 
livery Diesel we own is out on the road, pulling the Comet and the 
transcontinental freights, and there wasn't a spare one anywhere on 
the s>stem, except— well, that was an exception I wasn't going to 
mention to Mr. Clifton Locey. Mr. Locey raised the roof, screaming 
that come hell or high water we couldn’t refuse a demand of Mr. 
Chick Morrison. 1 don't know what damn fool finally told him about 
the extra Diesel that was kept at Winston, Colorado, at the mouth 
of the tunnel. You know the way our Diesels break down nowadays, 
they’re all breathing their last — so you can understand why that extra 
Diesel had to be kept at the tunnel. I explained it to Mr. Locey. I 
threatened him. I pleaded. 1 told him that she had made it our 
strictest rule that Winston Station was never to be left without an 
extra Diesel He told me to remember that he was not Miss Tag- 
gart — as if I could ever forget it! — and that the rule was nonsense, 
because nothing had happened all these years, so Winston could do 
without a Diesel for a couple of months, and he wasn’t going to 
worry about some theoretical disaster in the future when we were 
up against the very real, practical, immediate disaster of getting Mr, 
Chick Mormon angry at us. Well, Chick’s Special got the Diesel 
The superintendent of the Colorado Division quit. Mr. Loccy gave 
that job to a friend of his own. I wanted to quit. J had never wanted 
lo so badl>. But I didn't. . . No, 1 haven’t heard from her. 1 haven’t 
heard o word since she left. Why do you keep questioning me about 
her? Forget it. She won’t be back. ... 1 don't know what it is that 

525 



Tm hoping for. Nothing, I guess. I just go day by day, and I try not 
to look ahead. At first, I hoped that somebody would save us. I 
thought maybe it would be Hank Rearden. But he gave in. I don’t 
know what they did to him to make him sign, but I know that it 
must have been something terrible. Everybody thinks so. Every- 
body’s whispering about it, wondering what sort of pressure was used 
on him. . . . No, nobody knows. He’s made no public statements and 
he’s refused to see anyone. . . . But, listen. I’ll tell you something 
else that everybody’s whispering about. Lean closer, will you?— 1 
don’t want to speak too loudly. They say that Orren Boyle seems to 
have known about that directive long ago, weeks or months in ad- 
vance, because he had started, quietly and secretly, to reconstruct 
his furnaces for the production of Rearden Metal, in one of his lesser 
steel plants, an obscure little place way out on the coast of Maine. 
He was ready to start pouring the Metal the moment Rcarden’s 
extortion paper — I mean. Gift Certificate — was signed. But — listen — 
the night before they were to start, Boyle’s men were heating the 
furnaces in that place on the coast, when they heard a voice, they 
didn’t know whether it came from a plane or a radio or some sort 
of loudspeaker, but it was a man’s voice and it said that he would 
give them ten minutes to get out of the place. They got out. They 
started going and they kept on going — because the man’s voice had 
said that he was Ragnar DanneskjOld. In the next half-hour, Boyle’s 
mills were razed to the ground. Razed, wiped out, not a brick of 
them left standing. They say it was done by long-range naval guns, 
from somewhere way out on the Atlantic. Nobody saw DanneskjOld’s 
ship. . . . That’s what people were whispering. The newspapers 
haven’t printed a word about it. The boys in Washington say that 
it’s only a rumor spread by panic-mongers. ... I don’t know whether 
the story is true. 1 think it is. 1 hope it is. . . . You know, when 1 
was fifteen years old, I used to wonder how any man could become 
a criminal. 1 couldn’t understand what would make it possible. 
Now — now I’m glad that Ragnar Danneskjold has blown up those 
mills. May God bless him and never let them find him, whatever and 
wherever he is! . . . Yes, that’s, what I’ve come to feel. Well, how- 
much do they think people can take? . . . It’s not so bad lor me in 
the daytime, because I can keep busy and not think, but it gets me 
at night. I can’t sleep any more, I lie awake for hours. . . . Yes! — if 
you want to know it — yes, it’s because I’m worried about her! I'm 
scared to death for her. Woodstock is just a miserable little hole of 
a place, miles away from anything, and the Taggart lodge is twenty 
miles farther, twenty miles of a twisting trail in a godforsaken forest. 
How do I know what might happen to her there, alone, and with 
the kind of gangs that are roving all through the country the$e nights 
just through such desolate parts of the country as the Berkshlres? . , . 
I know I shouldn’t think about it. 1 know that she can take* care of 
herself. Only 1 wish she’d drop me a line. I wish l could go there. 
But she told me not to. I told her I’d wait. . . . You know, j’m glad 
you’re here tonight. It helps me — talking to you and . . . ju|t seeing 
you here. You won’t vanish, like all the others, will you . . .1 What? 
Next week? . . . Oh, on your vacation. For how long? . . . How do 

526 



you rate a whole month’s vacation? ,,*I wish 1 could do that, too — 
take a month off at my own expense. But they wouldn’t let me. . . . 
Really? [ envy you. ... I wouldn’t have envied you a few years ago. 
But now — now I’d like to get away. Now I envy you — if you’ve been 
able to take a month off every summer lor twelve years. 1 ' 

* * 

It was a dark road, but it led in a new direction. Rearden walked 
from his mills, not toward his house, but toward the city of Philadel- 
phia. it was a great distance to walk, but he had wanted to do it 
tonight, as he had done it every evening of the past week. He felt 
at peace in the empty darkness of the countryside, with nothing but 
the black shapes of trees around him, with no motion but that of 
his own body and of branches stirring in the wind, with no lights but 
the slow sparks of the fireflies flickering through the hedges. The 
two hours between mills and city were his span of rest. 

He had moved out of his home to an apartment in Philadelphia. 
He had given no explanation to his mother and Philip, he had said 
nothing except that they could remain in the house if they wished 
and that Miss Ives would take care of their bills. He had asked them 
to tell Lillian, when she returned, that she was not to attempt to see 
him. They had stared at him in terrified silence. 

He had handed to his attorney a signed blank check and said, 
’Get me a divorce. On any grounds and at any cost. I don't care 
what means you use, how many of their judges you purchase or 
whether you find it necessary to stage a frame-up of my wife. Do 
whatever you wish. But there is to be no alimony and no property 
settlement 11 The attorney had looked at him with the hint of a wise, 
sad smile, as it this were an event he had expected to happen long 
ago. He had answered, "'Okay, Hank. It can be done. But it will 
take some time.” “Make it as fast as you am.” 

No one had questioned him about his signature on the Gift Cer- 
tificate. But he had noticed that the men at the mills looked at him 
with a kind of searching curiosity, almost as if they expected to find 
the scars of some physical torture on his body. 

He fell nothing- -nothing but the sense of an even, restful twilight, 
like a spread of slag over a molten metal, when it crusts and swallows 
the last brilliant spurt of the white glow within. He felt nothing at 
the thought of the looters who were now going to manufacture Rear- 
den Metal. His desire to hold his right to it and proudly to be the 
only one to sell it, had been his form of respect for his fellow men, 
his belief that to trade with them was an act of honor. The belief, 
the respect and the desire were gone. He did not care what men 
made, what they sold, where they bought his Metal or whether any 
of them would know that it had been his. The human shapes moving 
past him in the streets of the city were physical objects without any 
meaning. The countryside — with the darkness washing away all 
traces of human activity, leaving only an untouched earth which he 
had once been able to handle — was real. 

He carried a gun in his pocket, as advised by the policemen of 
the radio car that patrolled the roads; they had warned him that no 
road was safe after dark, these days. He felt, with a touch of mirthless 

527 



amusement, that the gun had been needed at the mills, not in the 
peaceful safety of loneliness and night; what could some starving 
vagrant take from him, compared to what had been taken by men 
who claimed to be his protectors? 

He walked with an effortless speed, feeling relaxed by a form of 
activity that was natural to him. This was his period of training for 
solitude, he thought; he had to learn to live without any awareness 
of people, the awareness that now paralyzed him with revulsion. He 
had once built his fortune, starting out with empty hands; now he 
had to rebuild his life, starting out with an empty spirit. 

He would give himself a short span of time for the training, he 
thought, and then he would claim the one incomparable value still 
left to him, the one desire that had remained pure and whole: he 
would go to Dagny. Two commandments had grown in his mind; 
one was a duty, the other a passionate wish. The first was never to 
let her learn the reason of his surrender to the looters; the second 
was to say to her the words which he should have known at their first 
meeting and should have said on the gallery of Ellis Wyatt’s house. 

There was nothing but the strong summer starlight to guide him. 
as he walked, but he could distinguish the highway and the remnant 
of a stone fence ahead, at the comer of a country crossroad. The 
fence had nothing to protect any longer, only a spread of weeds, a 
willow tree bending over the road and, farther in the distance, the 
ruin of a farmhouse with the starlight showing through its roof. 

He walked, thinking that even this sight still retained the power 
to be of value: it gave him the promise of a long stretch of space 
undisturbed by human intrusion. 

The man who stepped suddenly out into the road must have come 
from behind the willow tree, but so swiftly that it seemed as if he 
had sprung up from the middle of the highway. Rearden’s hand went 
to the gun in his pocket, but stopped: he knew — by the proud posture 
of the body standing in the open, by the straight line of the shoulders 
against thef starlit sky — that the man was not a bandit. When he 
heard the voice, he knew that the man was not a beggar. 

“f should like to speak to you, Mr. Rearden.” 

The voice had the firmness, the clarity and the special courtesy 
peculiar to men who are accustomed to giving orders. 

“Go ahead,” said Rearden, “provided you don’t intend to ask me 
for help or money.” 

The man’s garments were rough, but efficiently trim. He wore 
dark trousers and a dark blue windbreakcr closed tight at his throat, 
prolonging the lines of his long, slender figure. He wore a dark blue 
cap, and all that could be seen of him in the night were his hands, 
his face and a patch of gold-blond hair on his temple; The hands 
held no weapon, only a package wrapped in burlap, the size of a 
carton of cigarettes. 

“No, Mr. Rearden,” he said, “I don’t intend to ask yo^ for money, 
but to return it to you.” 

“To return money?” 

“Yes.” 

“What money?” 


528 



“A small refund on a very large debt/* 

“Owed by you?” 

“No, not by me. It is only a token payment, but I want you to 
iccept it as proof that if we live long enough, you and 1, every dollar 
>f that debt will be returned to you.” 

“What debt?” 

“The money that was taken from you by force.” 

He extended the package to Rearden, flipping the burlap open. 
Bearden saw the starlight run like fire along a mirror-smooth surface, 
-le knew, by its weight and texture, that what he held was a bar of 
olid gold. 

He looked from the bar to the man's face, but the face seemed 
larder and less revealing than the surface of the metal. 

“Who are you?” asked Rearden. 

“The friend of the friendless.” 

“Did you come here to give this to me?” 

“Yes.” 

“Do you mean that you had to stalk me at night, on a lonely road, 
n order, not to rob me, but to hand me a bar of gold?” 

“Yes.” 

“Why?” 

“When robbery is done in open daylight by sanction of the law, 
is it is done today, then any act of honoi or restitution has to be 
ndden underground.” 

“What made you think that Vd accept a gift of this kind?” 

“It is not a gift, Mr. Rearden. It is your own money. But 1 have 
>ne favor to ask ol you. It is a request, not a condition, because 
here can be no such thing as conditional property. The gold is yours, 
>o you are free to use it as you please. But I risked my life to bring 
t to you tonight, so 1 am asking, as a lavor, that you save it for the 
inure or spend it on yourself. On nothing but your own comfort 
tnd pleasure. Do not give it away and, above all, do not put it into 
vour business.” 

“Because 1 don’t want it to be of any benefit to anybody but you. 
Otherwise, 1 will have broken an oath taken long ago — as I am 
creaking every rule I had set for myself by speaking to you tonight.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“I have been collecting this money for you for a long time. But I 
Jid not intend to see you or tell you about it or give it to you until 
much later.” 

“Then why did you?” 

“Because l couldn’t stand it any longer.” 

“Stand what?” 

“I thought that I had seen everything one could see and that there 
was nothing I could not stand seeing. But when they took Rearden 
Metal away from you, it was too much, even for me. I know that 
you don’t need this gold at present. What you need is the justice 
which it represents, and the knowledge that there are men who care 
lor justice,.” 

Struggling not to give in to an emotion which he felt rising through 
his bewilderment, past all his doubts, Rearden tried to study the 

529 



man’s face, searching for some clue to help him understand. But the 
face had no expression; it had not changed once while speaking; it 
looked as if the man had lost the capacity to feel long ago, and what 
remained of him were only features that seemed implacable and 
dead. With a shudder of astonishment, Reardcn found himself think- 
ing that it was not the face of a man, but of an avenging angel. 

“Why did you care?" asked Rearden. "What do 1 mean to you?” 

"Much more than you have reason to suspect. And l have a friend 
to whom you mean much more than you will ever learn. He would 
have given anything to stand by you today. But he can’t come to 
you. So l came in his place." 

"What friend?" 

"I prefer not to name him." 

"Did you say that you've spent a long time collecting this money 
for me?" 

"1 have collected much more than this." He pointed at the gold 
"l am holding it in your name and 1 will turn it over to you when 
the time comes. This is only a sample, as proof that it does exist. 
And if you reach the day when you find yourself robbed of the last 
of your fortune, I want you to remember that you have a large bank 
account waiting for you." 

"What account?" 

"If you try to think of all the money that has been taken from 
you by force, you will know that your account represents a consider- 
able sum." 

"How did you collect it? Where did this gold come from?" 

"It was taken from those who robbed you." 

"Taken by whom?" 

"By me." 

"Who are you?" 

"Ragnar DanneskjOld." 

Rearden looked at him for a long, still moment, then let the gold 
fall out of )iis hands. 

Danneskjdld's eyes did not follow it to the ground, but remained 
fixed on Rearden with no change of expression. "Would you rather 
I were a law-abiding citizen, Mr. Rearden? If so, which law should 
I abide by? Directive 10-289?" 

"Ragnar Danneskjokl . . said Rearden, as if he were seeing the 
whole of the past decade, as if he were looking at the enormity of 
a crime spread through ten years and held within two words. 

“Look more carefully, Mr. Rearden. There are only two modes of 
living left to us today: to be a looter who robs disarmed victims or 
to be a victim who works for the benefit of his own despoilers. I did 
not choose to be either." t 

"You chose to live by means of force, like the rest o( them." 

"Yes — openly. Honestly, if you will. I do not rob who arc 
tied and gagged, I do not demand that my victims help ijhe, 1 do not 
tell them that I am acting for their own good. I stak^ my life in 
every encounter with men, and they have a chance to match their 
guns and their brains against mine in fair battle. Fair? It’s I against 
the organized strength, the guns, the planes, the battlelhips of five 

530 



continents. If it’s a moral judgment that you wish to pronounce, Mr. 
Rearden, then who is the man of higher morality: I or Wesley 
Mouch?” 

“I have no answer to give you,” said Rearden, his voice low. 

“Why should you be shocked, Mr. Rearden? I am merely comply- 
ing with the system which my fellow men have established. If they 
believe that force is the proper means to deal with one another, I 
am giving them what they ask for. If they believe that the purpose 
of my life is to serve them, let them try to enforce their creed. If 
they believe that my mind is their property — let them come and 
gel it.” 

“But what sort of life have you chosen? To what purpose are you 
giving your mind?” 

“To the cause of my love.” 

“Which is what?” 

“Justice.” 

“Served by being a pirate?” 

“By working for the day when I won't have to be a pirate any 
longer.” 

“Which day is that?” 

“The day when you’ll be free to make a profit on Rearden Metal.” 

“Oh God!” said Rearden, laughing, his voice desperate. “Is that 
\our ambition?” 

DanneskjOld's face did not change. “It is.” 

“Do you expect to live to sec that day?” 

“Yes. Don’t you?” 

“No.” 

“Then what are you looking forward to, Mr. Rearden?” 

“Nothing.” 

“What are you working for?” 

Rearden glanced at him. “Why do you ask that?” 

“To make you understand why I’m not.” 

“Don’t expect me ever to approve of a criminal ” 

“I don’t expect it. But there are a few things 1 want to help you 
to see.” 

“Even if they're true, the things you said, why did you choose to 
be a bandit? Why didn’t you simply step out, like — ” He stopped. 

“Like Ellis Wyatt, Mr. Rearden? Like Andrew Stockton? Like 
vour friend Ken Danagger?” 

“Yes!” 

“Would you approve of that?” 

”1 — ” He stopped, shocked by his own words. 

The shock that came next was to see Danneskjftld smile: it was 
like seeing the first green of spring on the sculptured planes of an 
ueherg. Rearden realized suddenly, for the first time, that Dannesk- 
jold’s face was more than handsome, that it had the startling beauty 
ef physical perfection — the hard, proud features, the scornful mouth 

a Viking’s statue — yet he had not been aware of it, almost as if 
the dead sternness of the face had forbidden the impertinence of an 
appraisal. ‘But the smile was brilliantly alive. 

i do approve of it, Mr. Rearden. But I’ve chosen a special mission 

531 



of my own. I'm after a man whom I want to destroy. He died many 
centuries ago, but until the last trace of him is wiped out of men's 
minds, we will not have a decent world to live in.’* 

“What man?" 

“Robin Hood," 

Rearden looked at him blankly, not understanding, 

“He was the man who robbed the rich and gave to the poor. Well, 
I'm the man who robs the poor and gives to the rich- -or, to be 
exact, the man who robs the thieving poor and gives back to the 
productive rich.'’ 

“What in blazes do you mean?” 

“If you remember the stories you’ve read about me in the newspa- 
pers. before they slopped printing them, you know that I have never 
robbed a private ship and never taken any private property. Nor 
have I e\er robbed a military vessel — because the purpose of a mili- 
tary fleet is to protect from violence the citizens who paid for it. 
which is the proper function of a government. But l have seized 
every loot-earner that came within range of my guns, every govern- 
ment relief ship, subsidy ship, loan slup, gift ship, every vessel with 
a cargo of goods taken by force from some men for the unpaid, 
unearned benefit of others, 1 seized the boats that sailed under the 
flag of the idea which I am fighting: the idea that need is a sacred 
idol requiring human sacrifices- -that the need of some men is the 
knife of a guillotine hanging over others — that all of us must live 
with our work, our hopes, our plans, our efforts at the mercy ol the 
moment when that knife will descend upon us — and that the extent 
of our ability is the extent of our danger, so that success will briny 
our heads down on the block, while failure will give us the right to 
pull the cord. This is the horror which Robin Hood immortalized as 
an ideal of righteousness. It is said that he fought against the looting 
rulers and returned the loot to those who had been robbed, but that 
is not the meaning of the legend which has survived. He is remem- 
bered, not as a champion of properly , but as a champion of need. 
not as & delender of the robbed, but as a provider of the poor. He 
is held to be the first man who assumed a halo of virtue by practicing 
charity with wealth which he did not own, by giving away goods 
which he had not produced, by making others pay for the luxury ot 
his pity. He is the man who became the symbol of ihe idea that 
need, not achievement, is the source of rights, that we don't have to 
produce, only to want, that the earned does not belong to us. but 
the unearned does He became a justification for every mediocrity 
who. unable to make his own living, had demanded the power to 
dispose of the property of his betters, by proclaiming his willingness 
to devote his life to his inferiors at the price of robbing his superiors. 
It is this foulest of creatures — the double-pat asite who lives on the 
sores of the poor and the blood of the rich — whom n|ien have come 
to regard as a moral ideal. And this has brought us toja world where 
the more a man produces, the closer he comes to th£ loss of all his 
rights, until, if his ability is great enough, he becomes a rightless 
creature delivered as prey to any claimant — while m order to be 
placed above rights, above principles, above morality^ placed where 

532 



anything is permitted to him, even plunder and murder, all a man 
has to do is to be in need Do you wonder why the world is collapsing 
around us? That is what I am fighting Mr. Rearden. Until men learn 
that of all human symbols, Robin Hood is the most immoral and the 
most contemptible, there will be no justice on earth and no way for 
mankind to survive.” 

Rearden listened, feeling numb. But under the numbness, like the 
first thrust of a seed breaking through, he felt an emotion he could 
not identify except that it seemed familiar and very distant, like 
something experienced and renounced long ago. 

“What I actually am, Mr, Rearden, is a policeman. It is a police- 
man’s duty to protect men from criminals — criminals being those 
who seize wealth by force. It is a policeman’s duty to retrieve stolen 
property and return it lo its owners. But when robbery becomes 
the purpose of the law, and the policeman’s duty becomes, not the 
protection, but the plunder of property — then it is an outlaw who has 
to become a policeman. I have been selling the cargoes I retrieved to 
some special customers of mine in this country, who pay me in gold. 
Also, I have been selling my cargoes to the smugglers and the black* 
market traders of the People’s States of Europe. Do you know the 
conditions of existence in those People’s States? Since production 
and trade-— not violence- -were decreed to be crimes, the best men 
of Europe had no choice but to become criminals The slave-drivers 
of those States are kept in power by the handouts from their fellow 
looters in countries not yet fully drained, such as this country', I do 
nut let the handouts reach them. 1 sell the goods to Europe’s law- 
breakeis; at the highest prices 1 can get. and l make them pay me 
m gold. Gold is the objective value, the means of preserving one’s 
wealth and one’s future. Nobody is permitted to have gold in Europe, 
except the whip-wielding friends of humanity, who claim that they 
spend it for the welfare of theii victims. That is the gold which my 
smuggler-customers obtain to pay me. How? By the same method l 
use to obtain the goods. And then I return the gold to those from 
whom the goods were stolen — to you, Mr. Rearden, and to other 
men like you.” 

Rearden grasped the nature of the emotion he had forgotten. It 
was the emotion he had felt when, at the age of fourteen, he had 
looked at his first pay check — when, at the age of twenty-four, he 
had been made superintendent of the ore mines — when, as the owner 
of the mines, he had placed, in his own name, his first order for new 
equipment from the best concern of the time. Twentieth Century 
Motors— an emotion of solemn, joyous excitement, the sense of win- 
ning his place in a world he respected and earning the iccognition 
of men he admired. For almost two decades, that emotion had been 
huned under a mountain of wreckage, as the years had added layer 
upon gray layer of contempt, of indignation, of his struggle not to 
look around him, not to see those he dealt with, not to expect any- 
thing from men and to keep, as a private vision within the four walls 
of his office, the sense of that world into which he had hoped to 
rise. Vet there it was again, breaking through from under the wreck- 
age, that feeling of quickened interest, of listening to the luminous 

533 



and knew that the austerity of the marble face was the form of a 
disciplined capacity to feel too deeply. The even voice was continu- 
ing dispassionately: 

“I wanted you to know this. I wanted you to know it now, when 
it must seem to you that you’re abandoned at the bottom of a pit 
among subhuman creatures who are all that's left of mankind. I 
wanted you to know, in your most hopeless hour, that the day of 
deliverance is much closer than you think. And there was one special 
reason why I had to speak to you and tell you my secret ahead of 
the proper time. Have you heard of what happened to Orren Boyle's 
steel mills on the coast of Maine?” 

“Yes.” said Reardcn — and was shocked to hear that the word 
came as a gasp out of the sudden jolt of eagerness within him. ”1 
didn't know whether it was true.” 

“It's true. 1 did it. Mr. Boyle is not going to manufacture Reatden 
Metal on the coast of Maine. He is not going to manufacture it 
anywhere. Neither is any other looting louse who thinks that a direc- 
tive can give him a right to your brain. Whoever attempts to produce 
that Metal, will find his furnaces blown up, his machinery blasted, 
his shipments wrecked, his plant set on fire— so many things will 
happen to any man who tries it, that people will sav there's a curse 
on it, and there will soon be no worker in the country willing to 
enter the plant of any new producer of Reardon Metal. If men like 
Boyle think that force is all they need to rob their betters-— let them 
see what happens when one of their betters chooses to resort to 
force, I wanted you to know, Mr. Reardon, that none of them will 
produce your Metal nor make a penny on tt,” 

Because he felt an exultant desire to laugh— as he had laughed at 
the news of Wyatt's fire, as he had laughed at the crash of d’Ancomu 
Copper — ai?d knew that if he did, the thing he feared would hold 
him, would not release him this tune, and he would never see his 
mills again — Reardcn drew back and, lor a moment, kept his lips 
dosed tight to utter no sound. When the moment was over, he said 
quietly, his voice firm and dead, “Take that gold of yours and get 
away from here. I won't accept the help of a criminal.” 

Danneskjdld’s face showed no reaction. “I cannot force you to 
accept the gold, Mr. Rearden. But I will not take it back. You may 
leave it lying where it is, if you wish.” 

“I don’t want your help and 1 don’t intend to protect you. If I 
were within reach of a phone, 1 would call the police. I would and 
I will, if you ever attempt to approach me again. I’ll do it— in sell- 
protection.” 

*T understand exactly what you mean.” 

“You know — because I’ve listened to you, because you’ve seen 
me eager to hear it that I haven't damned you as 1 should. I can't 
damn you or anyone else. There are no standards lef$ for men to 
live by, so I don't care to judge anything they do todaj^ or in what 
manner they attempt to endure the unendurable. If thisfis your man- 
ner, I will let you go to hell in your own way, but 1 wajht no part of 
it. Neither as your inspiration nor as your accomplice. jDon’t expect 
me ever to accept your bank account, if it does exist.: Spend it on 

536 



"As an advocate of reason, 
egoism and capitalism, 

I seek to reach the men of the 
intellect — wherever such may 


DO YOU share Ayn Rand's view of life? Do yon 

want to fight today's cultural and political trends? 

If you take the ideas in this book seriously; you will 

want to find out about... 

♦ Hie Ayn Rand Institute: The Center for the Ad- 
vancement of Objectivism. 

♦ Mail order service for books, taped lectures and 
taped courses by Ayn Rand and others on the 
philosophy of Objectivism. 

♦ Reprints of Ayn Rand s own periodicals such as 
The Ayn Rand Letter. 

♦ Objectivist conferences. 

♦ College Objectivist clubs. 

♦ Current periodicals analyzing cultural and 
political issues from an Objectivist perspective. 

Information on all these is yours FRHh, with no 

obligation. Just fill out and mad this card today. 


NAME (PLEASE PRINT) 


A00RESS 



CITY STATE ZIP 


OBJECTIVISM 

Box 177, Murray Hill Station 

New York, NY 10157-0555 

http://www.boxl77.com 


still be found. 


1 ^ 14 * fytnl 





Q_ 

LU 

cn 

CO 

CO 

LU 


CO 8 

3 3 

0Q ° 

H 

CO 

or 


<D 

0) 

(/) 

</) 

■o 

■O 

CO 

> 

X) 

u 

'5 

O. 

n 


<D 

o 

CD 

<0 

o 

CL 


in 

m 

m 

o 

sL £ 
jjj 8 z 

O 

CO o > 
OlZ 


If you take the ideas in this book seriously, arid want 
to find out more about Ayn Rand's philosophy, write to 
Objectivism, Box 177, Murray Hill Station, 

New York, NY 10157-0555 
or fill out the form at http: //www.boxl77.com 


lliliiitinllliiiiltfiililiililiiiilli 



some extra armor plate for yourself — because I'm going to report 
this to the police and give them every due I can to set them on 
your trail.” 

Danneskjold did not move or answer. A freight train was rolling 
hy. somewhere in the distance and darkness; they could not see it 
hut they heard the pounding beat of wheels filling the silence, and 
it seemed close, as if a disembodied train, reducing to a long string 
of sound, were going past them in the night. 

"You wanted to help me in my most hopeless hour?’* said Rear- 
den ‘*11 I am brought to where my only defender is a pirate, then 
1 don’t care to be defended any JongeT. You speak some remnant 
of a human language, so in the name of that, HI tel! you that 1 have 
no hope left, but J have the knowledge that when the end comes. I 
will have lived by my own standards, even while 1 was the only one 
to whom they remained valid. I will have lived in the world in which 
i started and I will go down with the last of it. I don't think you'll 
want to understand me, but — ” 

A beam of light hit them with the violence ol a physical blow. 
The clangor of the train had swallowed the noise of the motor and 
they had not heard the approach of the car that swept out of the 
side road, from behind the farmhouse. They were not in the car’s 
path, yet they heard the screech of brakes behind the two headlights, 
pulling an invisible shape to a slop. It was Reardon who jumped 
hack involuntarily and had time to marvel at his companion: the 
swiftness of Danneskjbld s self-control was that he did not move. 

It was a police car and it stopped beside them. 

The driver leaned out. "Oh, it s you. Mr. Reardon!” he said, touch- 
ing his lingers to his cap. “Good evening, sir.” 

"Hello,” said Rearden, fighting to control the unnatural abruptness 
of his voice 

There were two patrolmen in the front seat of the car and their 
faces had a tight look of purpose, not the look of their usual friendly 
intention to stop for a chat. 

“Mr. Rearden, did you walk from the mills by way of Edgewood 
Road, past Blacksmith Cove?” 

“Yes. Why?” 

“Did you happen to see a man anywhere around these parts, a 
stranger moving along in a hurry?” 

“Where?” 

“He’d be either on fool or in a battered wreck of a car that’s got 
a million-dollar motor.” 

“What man?” 

“A tall man with blond hair,” 

“Who is he?” 

“You wouldn’t believe it if I told you, Mr. Rearden. Did you 
see him?” 

Rearden was not aware of his own questions, only of the aston- 
ishing fact that he was able to force sounds past some beating barrier 
inside his throat. He was looking straight at the policeman, but he 
felt as if the focus of his eyes had switched to his side vision, and 
what he saw most clearly was Danneskj&ld’s face watching him with 

537 



no expression* with no line's, no muscle's worth of feeling. He saw 
D an ties kj Old’s arms hanging idly by his sides, the hands relaxed, with 
no sign of intention to reach for a weapon, leaving the tall, straight 
body defenseless and open — open as to a firing squad. He saw, in 
the light, that the face looked younger than he had thought and that 
the eyes were sky-blue. He felt that his one danger would be to 
glance directly at DanneskjOld — and he kept his eyes on the police- 
man, on the brass buttons of a blue uniform, but the object filling 
his consciousness, more forcefully than a visual perception, was Dan- 
neskjold’s body, the naked body under the clothes, the body that 
would be wiped out of existence. He did not hear his own words, 
because he kept hearing a single sentence in his mind, without con- 
text except the feeling that it was the only thing that mattered to 
him in the world: “If I should lose my life, to what better purpose 
could I give it?” 

“Did you see him, Mr. Rearden?” 

“No,” said Rearden. “I didn’t.” 

The policeman shrugged regretfully and closed his hands about the 
steering wheel. “You didn’t sec any man that looked suspicious?” 

“No.” 

“Nor any strange car passing you on the road?” 

“No.” 

The policeman reached for the starter. “They got word that he 
was seen ashore in these parts tonight, and they’ve thrown a dragnet 
over five counties. We re not supposed to mention his name, not to 
scare folks, but he’s a man whose head is worth three million dollars 
in rewards from all over the world.” 

He had pressed the starter and the motor was churning the air 
with bright cracks of sound, when the second policeman leaned for- 
ward. He had been looking at the blond hair under Danneskjold’s 
cap. 

“Who is that, Mr. Rearden?” he asked. 

“My new bodyguard,” said Rearden. 

“Oh . ' . ! A sensible precaution, Mr. Rearden, in times like these.” 

“Good night, sir.” 

The motor jerked forward. The red taillights of the car went 
shrinking down the road. Danneskjbld watched it go, then glanced 
pointedly at Rearden ’s right hand. Rearden realized that he had 
stood facing the policemen with his hand clutching the gun in his 
pocket and that he had been prepared to use it. 

He opened his fingers and drew his hand out hastily, Danneskjbld 
smiled. It was a smile of radiant amusement, the silent laughter of 
a clear, young spirit greeting a moment it was glad to have lived. 
And although the two did not resemble each other, the smile made 
Rearden think of Francisco d’Anconia. 

“You haven’t told a lie,” said Ragnar Danneskjold. “Your body- 
guard — that’s what I am and what I’ll deserve to be, |n many more 
ways than you can know at present. Thanks, Mr. Rearden, and so 
long— we'll meet again much sooner than l had hope#.” 

He was gone before Rearden could answer. He vanished beyond 
the stone fence, as abruptly and soundlessly as he had come. When 

53a 



Reardon turned to look through the farm field, there was no trace 
of him and no sign of movement anywhere in the darkness. 

Rearden stood on the edge of an empty road in a spread of loneli- 
ness vaster than it had seemed before. Then he saw, lying at his feet, 
an object wrapped in burlap, with one comet exposed and glistening 
m the moonlight, the color of the pirate's hair. He bent, picked it 
up and walked on. 

* * 

Kip Chalmers swore as the train lurched and spilled his cocktail 
over the table top. He slumped forward, his elbow in the puddle, 
and said: 

“God damn these railroads! What's the matter with their track? 
You'd think with all the money they’ve got they'd disgorge a little, 
so we wouldn't have to bump like farmers on a hay cart!" 

His three companions did not take the trouble to answer. It was 
late, and they remained in the lounge merely because an effort was 
needed to retire to their compartments. The lights of the lounge 
looked like feeble portholes in a tog of cigarette smoke dank w ith 
the odor ot alcohol. It was a private car. which Chalmers had de- 
manded and obtained for his journey; it was attached to the end of 
the Comet and it swung like the tail of a nervous animal as the 
Comet coiled through the curves of the mountains. 

‘Tm going to campaign for the nationalization of the railroads." 
said Kip C halmers, glaring defiantly at a small, gray man who looked 
at him without interest. “That's going to be my platform plank. I've 
got to have a platform plank. I don't like Jim Taggart. He looks 
like a soft-boiled clam. To hell with the railroads! It's time we took 
them over." 

“Go to bed." said the man, “if you expect to look like anything 
human at the big rally tomorrow." 

“Do you think we’ll make it?" 

“You’ve got to make it." 

“I know l'\e got to. But I don’t think we’ll get there on time. 
This goddamn snail of a super-special is hours late." 

“You've got to be there, Kip." said the man ominously, in that 
stubborn monotone of the unthinking which asserts an end without 
concern for the means. 

“God damn you, don't you suppose 1 know it?" 

Kip Chalmers had curly blond hair and a shapeless mouth. He 
came from a semi-wealthy, serra -distinguished family, but he sneered 
at wealth and distinction in a manner which implied that only a 
lop-rank aristocrat could permit himself such a degree of cynical 
indifference. He had gtaduated from a college which specialized in 
breeding that kind of aristocracy. The college had taught him that 
the purpose of ideas is to fool those who are stupid enough to think. 
He had made his way in Washington with the grace of a cat-burglar, 
climbing from bureau to bureau as from ledge to ledge of a crum- 
bling structure. He was ranked as semi -powerful, but his manner 
made laymen mistake him for nothing less than Wesley Mouch. 

For reasons of his own particular strategy. Kip Chalmers had de- 
cided to enter popular politics and to run for election as Legislator 

539 



from California, though he knew nothing about that state except the 
movie industry and the beach clubs. His campaign manager had done 
the preliminary work, and Chalmers was now on his way to face his' 
future constituents for the first time at an overpublicized rally in San 
Francisco tomorrow night. The manager had wanted him to start a 
day earlier, but Chalmers had stayed in Washington to attend a cock- 
tail party and had taken the last train possible. He had shown no 
concern about the rally until this evening, when he noticed that the 
Comet was running six hours late. 

His three companions did not mind his mood: they liked his liquor. 
Lester Tuck, his campaign manager, was a small, aging man with a 
face that looked as if it had once been punched in and had never 
rebounded. He was an attorney who, some generations earlier, would 
have represented shoplifters and people who stage accidents on the 
premises of rich corporations; now he found that he could do better 
by representing men like Kip Chalmers. 

Laura Bradford was Chalmers’ current mistress: he liked her be- 
cause his predecessor had been Wesley Mouch. She was a movie 
actress who had forced her way from competent featured player to 
incompetent star, not by means of sleeping with studio executives, 
but by taking the long-distance short cut of sleeping with bureau- 
crats. She talked economics, instead of glamour, for press interviews, 
in the belligerently righteous style of a third-rate tabloid: her eco- 
nomics consisted of the assertion that "we’ve got to help the poor." 

Gilbert Keith -Worthing was Chalmers’ guest, for no reason that 
either of them could discover. He was a British novelist of world 
fame, who had been populai thirty years ago; since then, nobody 
bothered to read what he wrote, but everybody accepted him as a 
walking classic. He had been considered profound for uttering such 
things as: "Freedom? Do let’s stop talking about freedom. Freedom 
is impossible. Man can never be free of hunger, of cold, of disease, 
of physical accidents. He can never be free of the tyranny of nature. 
So why should he object to the tyranny of a political dictatorship?" 
When all of Europe put into practice the ideas which he had 
preached, he came to live in America. Through the years, his style 
of writing and his body had grown flabby. At seventy, he was an 
obese old man with retouched hair and a manner of scornful cynicism 
retouched by quotations from the yogis about the futility of all 
human endeavor. Kip Chalmers had invited him. because it seemed 
to look distinguished. Gilbert Keith-Worthing had come along, be- 
cause he had no particular place to go. 

“God damn these railroad people!” said Kip Chalmers. "They’re 
doing it on purpose. They want to ruin my campaign. 1 can’t miss 
that rally! For Christ’s sake, Lester, do something!” 

"I’ve tried,” said Lester Tuck. At the train’s last slop, he had 
tried, by long-distance telephone, to find air transpoi’talion to com- 
plete their journey; but there were no commercial flights scheduled 
for the next two days. 

"If they don’t get me there on time, I’ll have their $calps and their 
railroad! Can’t we tell that damn conductor to hurry^” 

“You’ve told him three times.” 

540 



‘Til get him fired. He’s given me nothing but a lot of alibis about 
all their messy technical troubles. I expect transportation, not alibis. 
They can’t treat me like one of their day-coach passengers. I expect 
them to get me where I want to go when I want it. Don’t they know 
that I’m on this train?” 

“They know it by now,” said Laura Bradford. “Shut up, Kip. You 
bore me.” 

Chalmers refilled his glass. The car was rocking and the glassware 
tinkled faintly on the shelves of the bar. The patches of starlit sky 
in the windows kept swaying jerkily, and it seemed as if the stars 
were tinkling against one another. They could see nothing beyond 
the glass bay of the observation window at the end of the car, except 
the small halos of red and green lanterns marking the rear of the 
train, and a brief stretch of rail running away from them into the 
darkness. A wall of rock was racing the train, and the stars dipped 
occasionally into a sudden break that outlined, high above them, the 
peaks of the mountains of Colorado. 

“Mountains . . .” said Gilbert Keith-Worthing, with satisfaction. 
“It is a spectacle of this kind that makes one feel the insignificance 
of man. What is this presumptuous little bit of rail, which crude 
materialists are so proud of building-compared to that eternal gran- 
deur? No more than the basting thread of a seamstress on the hem 
of the garment of nature. If a single one of Ihosc granite giants chose 
to crumble, it would annihilate this train ” 

“Why should it choose to crumble?” asked Laura Bradford, with- 
out any particular interest. 

“I think this damn train is going slower,” said Kip Chalmers. 
“Those bastards are slowing down, in spite of what 1 told them!” 

“Well . . . it's the mountains, you know . . said Lester Tuck. 

‘Mountains be damned! Lester, what day is this? With ail those 
damn changes of time, l can't tell which — ” 

“It's May twenty-seventh,” sighed Lester Tuck. 

“It’s May twenty-eighth,” said Gilbert Keith-Worthing, glancing 
at his watch. “It is now twelve minutes past midnight.” 

“Jesus!” cried Chalmers. “Then the rally is todavV' 

“Yep,” said Lester Tuck. 

“We won’t make it! We — ” 

The train gave a sharper lurch, knocking the glass out of his hand. 
The thin sound of its crash against the floor mixed with the screech 
ot the wheel-flanges tearing against the rail of a sharp curve. 

“1 say,” asked Gilbert Keith-Worthing nervously, “are your rail- 
roads safe?” 

“Hell, yes!” said Kip Chalmers “We’ve got so many rules, regula- 
tions and controls that those bastards wouldn’t dare not to be 
safe* . . , Lester, how far are we now? What’s the next stop?” 

“There won't be any stop till Sail Lake City.” 

“I mean, what’s the next station?” 

Lester l uck produced a soiled map, which he had been consulting 
every few minutes since nightfall. “Winston,” he said. “Winston, 
(dorado.” 

Kip Chalmers reached for another glass. 

541 



“Tinky Holloway said that Wesley said that if you don’t win this 
election* you're through*” said Laura Bradford, She sat sprawled in. 
her chair, looking past Chalmers, studying her own face in a mirror 
on the wall of the lounge; she was bored and it amused her to needle 
his impotent anger. 

“Oh, be did, did he?” 

“Uh-huh. Wesley doesn't want what’s-hjs-name — whoever’s run- 
ning against you — to get into the Legislature. If you don’t win, Wes- 
ley will be sore as hell. Tinky said — ” 

“Damn that bastard! He’d better watch his own neck!” 

“Oh, I don’t know. Wesley tikes him very much.” She added, 
“Tinky Holloway wouldn’t allow some miserable train to make him 
miss an important meeting. They wouldn’t dare to hold him up.” 

Kip Chalmers sat staring at his glass. “I'm going to have the gov- 
ernment sebe all the railroads,” he said, his voice low. 

“Really,” said Gilbert Keith-Worthing, “1 don't see why you 
haven't done it long ago. This is the only country on earth backward 
enough to permit private ownership of railroads.” 

“Well, we’re catching up with you,” said Kip Chalmers. 

“Your country is so incredibly naive. It's such an anachronism 
All that talk about liberty and human rights — I haven’t heard it since 
the days of my great-grandfather. It’s nothing but a verbal luxury of the 
rich. After all, it doesn’t make any difference to the poor whether their 
livelihood is at the mercy of an industrialist or a bureaucrat.” 

“The day of the industrialists is over. This is the day of — ” 

The jolt felt as if the air within the car smashed them forward 
while the floor stopped under their feet. Kip Chalmers was flung 
down to the carpet. Gilbert Keith-Worthing was thrown across the 
tabletop, the fights were blasted out. Glasses crashed off the shelves 
the steel of the walls screamed as if about to rip open while a long, 
distant thud went like a convulsion through the wheels of the train 

When he raised his head, Chalmers saw that the car stood intact 
and stilj; he heard the moans of his companions and the first shriek 
of Laura Bradford’s hysterics. He crawled along the floor to the 
doorway, wrenched it open, and tumbled down the steps. Far ahead, 
on the side of a curve, he saw moving flashlights and a red glow ai 
a spot where the engine had no place to be. He stumbled through 
the darkness, bumping into half-clothed figures that waved the futile 
little flares of matches. Somewhere along the line, he saw a man 
with a flashlight and seized his arm. It was the conductor. 

“What happened?” gasped Chalmers. 

“Split rail,” the conductor answered impassively. “The engine 
went off the track.” 

“Off . . . ?” 

“On its side.” 

“Anybody . . . killed?” 

“No. The engineer’s all right. The fireman is hurt.*’ 

“Split rail? What do you mean, split rail?” 

The conductor’s face had an odd look; it was griift, accusing and 
closed. “Rail wears out, Mr. Chalmers,” he answered with a strange 
kind of emphasis. “Particularly on curves.” 

542 



“Didn't you know that it was worn out?” 

vk We knew.” 

“Well, why didn’t you have it replaced?” 

“It was going to be replaced. But Mr. Locey cancelled that?’ 

“Who is Mr Loccy?” 

“The man who is now our Operating Vice-President.” 

Chalmers wondered why the conductor seemed to look at him as 
if something about the catastrophe were his fault. “Well . . . well, 
aren’t you going to put the engine back on the track?” 

“That engine's never going to be put back on any track, from the 
looks of it.'* 

“But . . . it’s got to move us!” 

“H can’t ” 

Beyond the few moving flares and the dulled sounds of screams; 
Chalmers sensed suddenly, not wanting to look at it, the black im- 
mensity of the mountains, the silence of hundred* ol unmhabited 
miles, and the precarious strip ol a ledge hanging between a wall of 
rock and an abyss. He gripped the conductor's arm tighter. 

‘But . but what are we going to do'*” 

“The engineer's gone to call Winston." 

“C all? How?" 

“There’s a phone couple of miles down the track.” 

“Will they get us out of here?” 

“They will.” 

“But . Then his mind made a connection with the past and 
the future, and his voice rose to a scream for the flrst time: “How 
long will we have to wait?" 

“1 don’t know,” said the conductor. He threw Chalmers' hand olf 
his arm, and walked away. 

The night operator at Winston Station listened to the phone mes- 
sage. dropped the receiver and raced up the stairs to shake the sta- 
tion agent out of bed. The station agent was a husky, surly drifter 
who had been assigned to the job ten days ago, by order of the new 
division superintendent. He stumbled dazedly to his feet, but he was 
knocked awake when the operator's words reached his brain. 

“What?" he gasped. “Jesus! The Comet? , . . Well, don’t stand 
there shaking! Cali Silver Springs!” 

The night dispatcher of the Division Headquarters at Silver 
Springs listened to the message, then telephoned Dave Mitch urn. the 
new superintendent of the Colorado Division. 

“The Comet?” gasped Mitchum, his hand pressing the telephone 
kceiver to his ear, his feet hitting the floor and throwing him upright, 
out of bed, “The engine done for? The Diesel ?” 

“Yes, sir.*’ 

"Oh God! Oh, God Almighty! What are we going to do?" Then, 
remembering his position, he added, “Well, send out the wrecking 
train.” 

“I have,” 

“Cali the operator at Sherwood to hold all traffic.” 

*i have.” 

“What have you got on the sheet?” 

543 



‘"The Array Freight Special, westbound. But it’s not due for about 
four hours. It’s running late.” 

“I’ll be right down. . . . Wait, listen, get Bill, Sandy and Clarence 
down by the time I get there. There’s going to be hell to pay!” 

Dave Mitchum had always complained about injustice, because, 
he said, he had always had bad luck. He explained it by speaking 
darkly about the conspiracy of the big fellows, who would never give 
him a chance, though he did not explain just whom he meant by 
“the big fellows.” Seniority of service was his favorite topic of com- 
plaint and sole standard of value; he had been in the railroad busi- 
ness longer than many men who had advanced beyond him; this, he 
said, was proof of the social system's injustice — though he never 
explained just what he meant by “the social system.” He had worked 
for many railroads, but had not stayed long with any one of them. 
His employers had had no specific misdeeds to charge against him, 
but had simply eased him out, because he said, “Nobody told me 
to!” too often. He did not know that he owed his present job to a 
deal between James Taggart and Wesley Mouch: when Taggart 
traded to Mouch the secret of his sister’s private life, in exchange 
for a raise in rates, Mouch made him throw in an extra favor, by 
their customary rules of bargaining, which consisted of squeezing all 
one could out of any given trade. The extra was a job for Dave 
Mitchum, who was the brother-in-law of Claude Slagenhop, who was 
the president of the Friends of Global Progress, who were regarded 
by Mouch as a valuable influence on public opinion. James Taggart 
pushed the responsibility of finding a job for Mitchum onto Clifton 
Locey. Loccy pushed Mitchum into the first job that came up — 
superintendent of the Colorado Division-— when the man holding it 
quit without notice. The man quit when the extra Diesel engine of 
Winston Station was given to Chick Morrison’s Special. 

“What are we going to do?” cried Dave Mitchum, rushing, half- 
dressed and groggy with sleep, into his office, where the chief dis- 
patcher, the trainmaster and the road foreman of engines were waiting 
for him. 

The three men did not answer. They were middle-aged men with 
years of railroad service behind them. A month ago, they would 
have volunteered their advice in any emergency; but they were begin- 
ning to learn that things had changed and that it was dangerous 
to speak. 

“What in hell are we going to do?” 

“One thing is certain,” said Bill Brent, the chief dispatcher. “We 
can’t send a train into the tunnel with a coal-burning engine.” 

Dave Mitchum’s eyes grew sullen: he knew that this was the one 
thought on all their minds; he wished Brent had not gamed it. 

“Well, where do we get a Diesel?” he asked angrily. 

“We don’t,” said the road foreman. \ 

“But we can’t keep the Comet waiting on a siding ^11 night!” 

“Looks like we’ll have to,” said the trainmaster. “What’s t be use 
of talking about it, Dave? You know that there is nb Diesel any- 
where on the division.” 


544 



“But Christ Almighty, how do they expect us to move trains with- 
out engines?” 

“Miss Taggart didn’t,” said the road foreman. “Mr. Locey does.” 

“Bill,” asked Mitchum, in the tone of pleading for a favor, “isn't 
there anything transcontinental that’s due tonight, with any sort of 
a Diesel?” 

“The first one to come,” said Bill Brent implacably, “will be Num- 
ber 236, the fast freight from San Francisco, which is due at Winston 
at seven-eighteen am" He added, “That’s the Diesel closest to us 
at this moment. I’ve checked.” 

“What about the Army Special?” 

“Better not think about it, Dave. That one has priority over every- 
thing on the line, including the Comet, by order of the Army, 
They’re running late as it is — journal boxes caught fire twice. They’re 
carrying munitions for the West Coast arsenals. Better pray that 
nothing stops them on your division. If you think we’ll catch hell for 
holding the Comet, it’s nothing to what we’ll catch if we try to stop 
that Special.” 

They remained silent. The windows were open to the summer night 
and they could hear the ringing of the telephone in the dispatcher’s 
office downstairs. 'Hie signal lights winked over the deserted yards that 
had once been a busy division point. 

Mitchum looked toward the roundhouse; where the black silhou- 
ettes of a few steam engines stood outlined m a dim light. 

“The tunnel — ” he said and stopped. 

“—is eight miles long,” said the trainmaster, with a harsh emphasis, 

“I was only thinking,” snapped Mitchum. 

“Better not think of it,” said Brent softly. 

“I haven’t said anything!” 

“What was that talk you had with Dick Horton before he quit?” 
the road foreman asked t<x> innocently, as if the subject were irrele- 
vant. “Wasn’t it something about the ventilation system of the tunnel 
being on the bum? Didn't he say that the tunnel was hardly safe 
nowadays even for Diesel engines?” 

“Why do you bring that up?” snapped Mitchum. “I haven’t said 
anything!” Dick Horton, the division chief engineer, had quit three 
days after Mitchum’s arrival. 

“I thought I’d just mention it,” the road foreman answered 
innocently. 

“Look, Dave,” said Bill Brent, knowing that Mitchum would stall 
for another hour rather than formulate a decision, “you know that 
there's only one thing to do: hold the Comet at Winston till morning, 
wait for Number 236, have her Diesel take the Comet through the 
tunnel, then let the Comet finish her run with the best coal-burner 
we can give her on the other side.” 

“But how late will that make her?” 

Brent shrugged. “Twelve hours — eighteen hours — who knows?” 

“Eighteen hours— for the Comet? Christ, that’s never happened 
before!” 

“None of what’s been happening to us has ever happened before,” 

545 



said Brent, with an astonishing sound of weariness in his brisk, com- 
petent voice. 

"’But they’ll blame us for it in New York! They’ll put all the blame 
on us!” 

Brent shrugged. A month ago, he would have considered such an 
injustice inconceivable; today, he knew belter. 

“I guess . . said Mitchum miserably, “I guess there’s nothing 
else that we can do.” 

“There isn't, Dave.” 

“Oh God! Why did this have to happen to us?” 

“Who is John Galt?” 

It was half-past two when the Coirnt, pulled by an old switch 
engine, jerked to a stop on a siding of Winston Station. Kip Chalmers 
glanced out with incredulous anger at the few shanties on a desolate 
mountainside and at the ancient hovel of a station. 

“Now what? What in hell are they stopping here for?” he cried, 
and rang for the conductor 

With the return of motion and safety, his terror had turned into 
rage. He felt almost as if he had been cheated bv having been made 
to experience an unnecessary fear. His companions were still clinging 
to the tables of the lounge; they felt too shaken to sleep. 

“How long?” the conductor said impassively, in answer to his 
question. “ Till morning, Mr. Chalmers.” 

Chalmers stared at him, stupefied. “We're going to stand here 
fill morning?” 

“Yes, Mr. Chalmers.” 

’Here?'" 

“Yes.” 

“But 1 have a rally in San Francisco in the evening!” 

The conductor did not answer. 

“Why? Why do we have to stand? Why in hell? What happened 7 ” 

Slowly, patiently, with contemptuous politeness, the conductor 
gave him .an exact account of the situation. But years ago, in gram- 
mar school, in high school, in college. Kip Chalmers had been taught 
that man does not and need not live by reason. 

“Damn your tunnel!” he screamed. “Do you think I’m going to 
let you hold me up because of some miserable tunnel? Do you want 
to wreck vital national plans on account of a tunnel? Tell your engi- 
neer that l must be in San Francisco by evening and that he's got 
to get me there!” 

“How?” 

“That’s your job, not mine!” 

“There is no way to do it.” 

“Then find a way, God damn you!” 

The conductor did not answer. 

“Do you think I’ll let your miserable technological problems inter- 
fere with crucial social issues? Do you know who J ajm? Tell that 
engineer to start moving, if he values his job!” 

“The engineer has his orders.” 

“Orders be damned! / give the orders these days! Tel him to start 
at once!” 


546 



“Perhaps you’d better speak to the station agent, Mr. Chalmers. 

I have no authority to answer you as I’d like to,” said the conductor, 
and walked out. 

Chalmers leaped to his feet. “Say, Kip . . said Lester Tuck 
uneasily, “maybe it’s true . . . maybe they can’t do it.” 

“They can if they have to!” snapped Chalmers, marching reso- 
lutely to the door. 

Years ago, in college, he had been taught that the only effective 
means to impel men to action was fear. 

In the dilapidated office of Winston Station, he confronted a sleepy 
man with slack, worn features, and a frightened young boy who sat 
at the operator’s desk. They listened, in silent stupor, to a stream of 
profanity such as they had never heard from any section gang. 

“ — and it’s not my problem how you get the train through the 
tunnel, that’s for you to figure out!” Chalmers concluded. “But if 
you don’t get me an engine and don’t start that train, you can kiss 
goodbye to your jobs, your work permits and this whole goddamn 
railroad!” 

Hie station agent had never heard of Kip Chalmers and did not 
know the nature of his position. But he knew that this was the day 
when unknown men in undefined positions held unlimited power — 
the power of life or death. 

“It’s not up to us, Mr. Chalmers,” he said pleadingly. “We don’t 
issue the orders out here. The order came from Silver Springs. Sup- 
pose you telephone Mr. Mitchum and — ” 

“Who’s Mr. Mitchum?” 

“He’s the division supeiintendent at Silver Springs. Suppose you 
send him a message to—” 

“I should bother with a division superintendent! Tli send a mes- 
sage to Jim Taggart — that’s what Tm going to do!” 

Before the station agent had time to recover, Chalmers whirled to 
the boy, ordering, “You — take this down and send it at once!” 

It was a message which, a month ago, the station agent would not 
have accepted from any passenger; the rules forbade it; but he was 
not certain about any rules any longer. 

Mr. James Taggart, New York City, Am held up on the Comet at 
Winston, Colorado, by the incompetence of your men, who refuse 
to give me an engine. Have meeting in San Francisco in the evening 
of top-level national importance. If you don’t move my train at once, 
I'll let you guess the consequences. 

Kip Chalmers. 

After the boy had transmitted the words onto the wires that 
stretched from pole to pole across a continent as guardians of the 
Taggart track— after Kip Chalmers had returned to his car to wait 
tor an answer — the station agent telephoned Dave Mitchum, who 
was his friend, and read to him the text of the message. He heard 
Mitchum groan in answer. 

“I thought I’d tell you, Dave. I never heard of the guy before, but 
maybe he’s somebody important.” 

“I 'don’t know!” moaned Mitchum. "Kip Chalmers? You see his 
name in the newspapers all the time, right in with all the top-level 

547 



boys. 1 don’t know what he is, but if he’s from Washington, we can’t 
take any chances. Oh Christ, what are we going to do?” 

We can’t take any chances — thought the Taggart operator in New 
York, and transmitted the message by telephone to James Taggart’s 
home. It was close to six a m. in New York, and James Taggart was 
awakened out of the fitful sleep of a restless night. He listened to 
the telephone, his face sagging. He felt the same fear as the station 
agent of Winston, and for the same reason. 

He called the home of Clifton Locey. All the rage which he could 
not pour upon Kip Chalmers, was poured over the telephone wire 
upon Clifton Locey. “Do something!” screamed Taggart. “I don't 
care what you do, it’s your job, not mine, but see to it that that train 
gets through! What in hell is going on? I never heard of the Comet 
being held up! Is that how you run your department? It’s a fine 
thing when important passengers have to start sending messages to 
me\ At least, when my sister ran the place, I wasn’t awakened in the 
middle of the night over every spike that broke in Iowa — Colorado, I 
mean!” 

“Tin so sorry. Jim," said Clifton Locey smoothly, in a tone that 
balanced apology, reassurance and the right degree ot patronizing 
confidence. “It’s just a misunderstanding. It’s somebody’s stupid mis- 
take. Don’t worry. I’ll take care of it. I was, as a matter of fact, in 
bed, but TH attend to it at once.” 

Clifton Loccy was not in bed; he had just returned from a round 
of night clubs, in the company of a young lady. He asked her to wait 
and hurried to the offices of Taggart Transcontinental. None of the 
night staff who saw him there could say why he chose to appear in 
person, but neither could they say that it had been unnecessary. He 
rushed in and out of several offices, was seen by many people and 
gave an impression of great activity. The only physical result of it 
was an order that went over the wires to Dave Mitchum, superinten- 
dent of the Colorado Division: 

“Give an engine to Mr. Chalmers at once. Send the Comet through 
safely and without unnecessary delay If you are unable to perform 
your duties, I shall hold you responsible before the Unification 
Board. Clifton Locey.” 

Then, calling his girl friend to join him, Clifton Locey drove to a 
country roadhouse — to make certain that no one would be able to 
find him in the next few hours. 

The dispatcher at Silver Springs was baffled by the order that he 
handed to Dave Milchum, but Dave Mitchum undeistood. He knew 
that no railroad order would ever speak in such terms as giving an 
engine to a passenger, he knew that the thing was a show piece, he 
guessed what sort of show was being staged, and he felt $ cold sweat 
at the realization of who was being framed as the goat the show. 

“What’s the matter, Dave?” asked the trainmaster. 

Mitchum did not answer. He seized the telephone, his hands shak- 
ing as he begged for a connection to the Taggart operator m New 
York. He looked like an animal in a trap. 

He begged the New York operator to get him Mr. Clifton Locey’s 
home. The operator tried. There was no answer. He begged the 

548 



operator to keep on trying and to try every number he could think 
of, where Mr. Locey might be found. The operator promised and 
Mitchum hung up, but knew that it was useless to wait or to speak 
to anyone in Mr. Locey's department, 

“What’s the matter, Dave?” 

Mitchum handed him the order —and saw by the look on the train- 
master’s face that the trap was as bad as he had suspected. 

He called the Region Headquarters of Taggart Transcontinental 
at Omaha, Nebraska, and begged to speak to the general manager 
of the region. There was a brief silence on the wire, then the voice 
of the Omaha operator told him that the general manager had re- 
signed and vanished three days ago — “over a little trouble with Mr. 
Locey*” the voice added. 

He asked to speak to the assistant general manager in charge of 
his particular district; but the assistant was out of town for the week 
end and could not be reached. 

“Get me somebody else!'' Mitchum screamed. “Anybody, of any 
district! For Christ’s sake, get me somebody who’ll tel! me what 
to do!” 

The man who came on the wire was the assistant general manager 
ol the Iowa-Minnesota District. 

“What?” he interrupted at Mitchum’s first words. “At Winston, 
Colorado? Why in hell arc you calling me ? . . . No, don't tell me 
what happened, I don't want to know it! . , . No. 1 said! No! You’re 
not going to frame me into having to explain afterwards why I did 
or didn’t do anything about whatever it is. It's not my problem! . . . 
Speak to some region executive, don’t pick on me, what do 1 have 
to do with Colorado** ... Oh hell, 1 don’t know, get the chief engi- 
neer, speak to him!” 

I he chief engineer of the Central Region answered impatiently, 
“Yes? What? What is it?” and Mitchum rushed desperately to ex- 
plain. When the chief engineer heard that there was no Diesel, he 
snapped, “Then hold the train, of course!” When he heard about 
Mr. Chalmers, he said, his voice suddenly subdued. “Hm , . , Kip 
Chalmers? Of Washington? . . . Well, I don’t know. That would be 
a matter for Mr. Locey to decide.” When Mitchum said, “Mr. Locey 
oidered me to arrange it, but—” the chief engineer snapped in great 
relief, “Then do exactly as Mr. Locey says!” and hung up. 

Dave Mitchum replaced the telephone receiver cautiously. He did 
not scream any longer. Instead, he tiptoed to a chair, almost as if he 
were sneaking. He sat looking at Mr. Locey’s order for a long time. 

Then he snatched a glance about the room. The dispatcher was 
busy at his telephone. The trainmaster and the road foreman were 
there, but they pretended that they were not waiting. He wished Bill 
Brent, the chief dispatcher, would go home; Bill Brent stood in a 
corner, watching him. 

Brent was a short, thin man with broad shoulders; he was forty, 
hut looked younger; he had the pale face of an office worker and 
the hard, lean features of a cowboy. He was the best dispatcher on 
the system. 


549 



Mitchum rose abruptly and walked upstairs to his office, clutching 
Locey *s order in his hand. 

Dave Mitchuin was not good at understanding problems of engi- 
neering and transportation, but he understood men like Cliiton 
Locey. He understood the kind of game the New York executives 
were playing and whaf they were now' doing to him. The order did 
not tell him to give Mr. Chalmers a coal-burning engine— just “an 
engine.” If the time came to answer questions, wouldn't Mr. Locey 
gasp in shocked indignation that he had expected a division superin- 
tendent to know that only a Diesel engine could be meant in that 
order? llic order stated that he was to send the Comet through 
"safely” — wasn’t a division superintendent expected to know what 
was safe? — ‘ v and without unnecessary delay.” What was an unneces- 
sary delay? If the possibility of a major disaster was involved, 
wouldn't a delay of a week or a month bo considered necessary? 

The New York executives did not care, thought Mitchum; they 
did not care whether Mr. Chalmers reached his meeting on time, or 
whether an unprecedented catastrophe struck their rails; they cared 
only about making sure that they would not be blamed for either. 
If he held the train, they would make him the scapegoat to appease 
the anger of Mr. Chalmers: if he sent the tram through and it did 
not reach the western portal of the tunnel, they would put the blame 
on his incompetence; they would claim that he had acted against 
their orders, in either case. What would he be able to prove? To 
whom? One could prove nothing to a tribunal that had no staled 
policy, no defined procedure, no rules of evidence, no binding princi- 
ples —a tribunal, such as the Unification Board, that pronounced men 
guilty or innocent as it saw fit. with no standard of guilt or innocence. 

Dave Mitchum knew nothing about the philosoph> of law; but he 
knew that when a court is not bound by any rules, it is not bound 
by any facts, and then a hearing is not an issue of justice, but an 
issue of men, and your fate depends not on what you have or have 
not done/ but on whom you do or do not know He asked himself 
what chance he would have at such a hearing against Mr. James 
Taggart, Mr. Clifton Locey, Mr. Kip Chalmers and their powerful 
friends, 

Dave Mitchum had spent his life slipping around the necessity of 
ever making a decision; he had done it by waiting to be told and 
never being certain of anything. All that he now allowed into his 
brain was a long, indignant whine against injustice. Fate, he thought, 
had singled him out for an unfair amount of bad luck: he was being 
framed by his superiors on the only good job. he had ever held. He 
had never been taught to understand that the manner in which he 
obtained this job, and the frame-up, were inextricably parts of a 
single whole. 

As he looked at Locey's order, he thought that he cduid hold the 
Comet; attach Mr. Chalmers’ car to an engine and setfd it into the 
tunnel, alone. But he shook his head before the thought was full) 
formed; he knew that this would force Mr. Chalmers ;to recognize 
the nature of the risk: Mr. Chalmers would refuse; he would continue 
to demand a safe and non-existent engine. And more: this could 

550 



mean that he, Mitchum, would have to assume responsibility, admit 
full knowledge of the danger, stand in the open and identify the 
exact nature of the situation — the one act which the policy of his 
superiors was based on evading, the one key to their game. 

Dave Mitchum was not the man to rebel against his background 
or to question the moral code of those in charge. The choice he 
made was not to challenge, but to follow the policy of his superiors. 
Bill Brent could have beaten him in any contest of technology, but 
here was an endeavor at which he could beat Bill Brent without 
effort. There had once been a society where men needed the particu- 
lar talents of Bill Brent, if they wished to survive; what they needed 
now was the talent of Dave Mitchum. 

Dave Mitchum sat down at his secretary’s typewriter and, by 
means of two fingers, carefully typed out an order to the trainmaster 
and another to the road foreman. The first instructed the trainmaster 
to summon a locomotive crew at once, tor a purpose described only 
as “an emergency”; the second instructed the road foreman to “send 
the best engine available to Winston, to stand by for emergency 
assistance.” 

He put carbon copies of the orders into his own pocket, then 
opened the door, yelled for the night dispatcher to come up and 
handed him the two orders for the two men downstairs. The night 
dispatcher was a conscientious young boy who trusted his superiors 
and knew that discipline was the first rule of the railroad business. 
He was astonished that Mitchum should wish to send written orders 
down one flight of stairs, but he asked no questions. 

Mitchum waited nervously. After a while, he saw the figure of the 
road foreman walking across the yards toward the roundhouse. He 
fell relieved: the two men had not come up to confront him in per- 
son; they had understood and they would play the game as he was 
playing it. 

The road foreman walked across the yards, looking down at the 
ground. He was thinking of his wife, his two children and the house 
which he had spent a lifetime to own. He knew what his superiors 
were doing and he wondered whether he should refuse to obey them. 
He had never been afraid of losing his job; with the confidence of a 
competent man, he had known that if he quarreled with one em- 
ployer, he would always be able to find another. Now, be was afraid; 
he had no right to quit or to seek a job; if he defied an employer, 
he would be delivered into the unanswerable power of a single 
Board, and if the Board ruled against him, it would mean being 
sentenced to the slow death of starvation: it would mean being 
barred from any employment. He knew that the Board would rule 
against him; he knew that the key to the dark, capricious mystery 
of the Board’s contradictory decisions was the secret power of pull 
What chance would he have against Mr. Chalmers? There had been 
a time when the self-interest of his employers had demanded that 
he exercise his utmost ability. Now, ability was not wanted any 
longer. There had been a time when he had been requited to do his 
best' and rewarded accordingly. Now, he could expect nothing but 
punishment, if he tried to follow his conscience. There had been a 

551 



time when he had been expected to think. Now, they did not want 
him to think, only to obey. They did not want him to have a con- 
science any longer. Then why should he raise his voice? For whose 
sake? He thought of the passengers — the three hundred passengers 
aboard the Comet. He thought of his children. He had a son in high 
school and a daughter, nineteen, of whom he was fiercely, painfully 
proud, because she was recognized as the most beautiful girl in town. 
He asked himself whether he could deliver his children to the fate 
of the children of the unemployed, as he had seen them in the 
blighted ateas, in the settlements around closed factories and along 
the tracks of discontinued railroads. He saw, in astonished horror, 
that the choice which he now had to make was between the lives of 
his children and the lives of the passengers on the Comet. A conflict 
of this kind had never been possible before. It was by protecting the 
safety of the passengers that he had earned the security of his chil- 
dren; he had served one by serving the other; there had been no 
clash of interests, no call for victims Now, if he wanted to save the 
passengers, he had to do it at the price of his children. He remem- 
bered dimly the sermons he had heard about the beauty of self- 
immolation, about the virtue of sacrificing to others that which was 
one's dearest. He knew nothing about the philosophy of ethics: but 
he knew suddenly — not in words, but in the form of a dark, angry, 
savage pain — that if this was virtue, then he wanted no part of it. 

He walked into the roundhouse and ordered a large, ancient coal- 
burning locomotive to be made ready for the run to Winston. 

The trainmaster reached for the telephone in the dispatcher’s of- 
fice, to summon an engine crew, as ordered. But his hand stopped, 
holding the receiver. It struck him suddenly that he was summoning 
men to their- death, and that of the twenty lives listed on the sheet 
before him, two would be ended by his choice. He felt a physical 
sensation of cold, nothing more; he felt no concern, only a puzzled, 
indifferent astonishment, ft had never been his job to call men out 
to die: his job had been to call them out to earn their living. It was 
strange, he thought: and it was strange that his hand had stopped; 
what made it stop was like something he would have felt twenty 
years ago — no, he thought, strange, only one month ago, not longer. 

He was forty-eight years old. He had no family, no friends, no ties 
to any living being in the world. Whatever capacity for devotion he 
had possessed, the capacity which others scatter among many ran- 
dom concerns, he had given it whole to the person of his young 
brother — the brother, his junior by twenty -five years, whom he had 
brought up, He had sent him through a technological college, and 
he had known, as had all the teachers, that the boy had the mark 
of genius on the forehead of his grim, young face. Witfi the same 
single-tracked devotion as his brother’s, the boy had cartijd for noth- 
ing but his studies, not for sports or parties or girls, qnly for the 
vision of the things he was going to create as an inven|or. He had 
graduated from college and had gone, on a salary unusual for his 
age, into the research laboratory of a great electrical* concern in 
Massachusetts. 

This was now May 28, thought the trainmaster. It was on May 1 

552 



that Directive 10--289 had been issued. It was on the evening of May 
1 that he had been informed that his brother had committed suicide. 

The trainmaster had heard it said that the directive was necessary 
to save the country. He could not know whether this was true or 
not, he had no way ot knowing what was necessary to save a country. 
But driven by some feeling which he could not express, he had 
walked into the office of the editor of the local newspaper and de- 
manded that they publish the story’ of his brother’s death. "‘People 
have to know it,’* had been all he could give as his reason. He had 
been unable to explain that the bruised connections of his mind had 
formed the wordless conclusion that if this was done by the will of 
the people, then the people had to know it; he could not believe 
that they would do it, if they knew. The editor had refused; he had 
stated that it would be bad lur the country’s morale. 

The trainmaster knew nothing about political philosophy; but he 
knew that that had been the moment when he lost all concern for 
the life or death of any human being or of the country. 

He thought, holding the telephone receiver, that maybe he should 
warn the men whom he was about to call. They trusted him; it would 
never occur to them that he could knowingly send them to their 
death. But he shook his head: this was only an old thought, last 
year’s thought, a remnant of the time when he had trusted them, 
loo It did not matter now. His brain worked slowly, as if he were 
dragging his thoughts through a vacuum where no emotion re- 
sponded to spur them on; he thought that there would be trouble if 
he warned anyone, there would be some sort of fight and it was he 
who had to make some great effort to start it. He had forgotten 
what it was that one started this sort of fight for. Truth? Justice? 
Brother-love? He did not want to make an eftort. He was very tired. 
If he warned all the men on his list, he thought, there would be no 
one to run that engine, so he would save two lives and also three 
hundred Jives aboard the Comet. But nothing responded to the fig- 
ures in his mind: “lives" was just a word, it had no meaning. 

He raised the telephone receiver to his ear, he called two numbers, 
he summoned an engineer and a fireman to report for duty at once. 

Engine Number 306 had left for Winston, when Dave Mitchum 
came downstairs. “Get a track motor car ready for me," he ordered, 
"Pm going to run up to Fairmount." Fairmount was a small station, 
twenty miles east on the line. The men nodded, asking no questions. 
Bill Brent was not among them. Mitchum walked into Brent’s office. 
Brent was there, sitting silently at his desk; he seemed to be waiting, 

Tm going to Fairmount,” satd Mitchum; his voice was aggres- 
sively too casual, as if implying that no answer was necessary. “They 
had a Diesel there couple of weeks ago . . . you know, emergency 
repairs or something, . . . I’m going down to see if we could use it." 

He paused, but Brent said nothing. ’ 

“The way things stack up,’* said Mitchum, not looking at him, “we 
can’t hold that train till morning. We’ve got to take a chance, one 
way or another. Now l think maybe this Diesel will do it, but that’s 
the last one we can try for. So if you don’t hear from me in half an 

553 



hour, sign the order and send the Comet through with Number 306 
to pull her.” 

Whatever Brent had thought, he could not believe it when he 
heard it. He did not answer at once; then he said, very quietly, “No.” 

“Wha*t do you mean, no?” 

“I won't do it.” 

“What do you mean, you won’t? It’s an order!” 

“I won’t do it.” Brent’s voice had the firmness of certainty un- 
clouded by any emotion. 

“Are you refusing to obey an order?” 

“I am.” 

“But you have no right to refuse! And I’m not going to argue 
about it, either. It’s what I’ve decided, it’s my responsibility and I’m 
not asking for your opinion. Your job is to take my orders.” 

“Will you give me that order in writing?” 

“Why, God damn you, are you hinting that you don’t trust me? 
Are you . . . ?” 

“Why do you have to go to Fairmount. Dave? Why can’t you 
telephone them about the Diesel, if you think that they have one?” 

“You’re not going to tell me how to do my job! You’re not going 
to sit there and question me! You’re going to keep your trap shut 
and do as you’re told or I’ll give you a chance to talk — to the Unifi- 
cation Board!” 

It was hard to decipher emotions on Brent’s cowboy face, but 
Mitchum saw something that resembled a look of incredulous horror; 
only it was horror at some sight of his own, not at the words, and 
it had no quality of fear, not the kind of fear Mitchum had hoped for. 

Brent knew that tomorrow morning the issue would be his word 
against Mitchum’s; Mitchum would deny having given the order; Mil- 
chum would show written proof that Engine Number 306 had been 
sent to Winston only “to stand by;” and would produce witnesses 
that he had gone to Fairmount in search of a Diesel; Mitchum would 
claim that the fatal order had been issued by and on the sole respon- 
sibility of Bill Brent, the chief dispatcher. It would not be much of 
a case, not a case that could bear close study, but it would be enough 
for the Unification Board, whose policy was consistent only in not 
permitting anything to be studied closely. Brent knew that he could 
play the same game and pass the frame — up on to another victim, 
he knew that he had the brains to work it out — except that he would 
rather be dead than do it. 

It was not the sight of Mitchum that made him sit still in horror. 
It was the realization that there was no one whom he could call to 
expose this thing and stop it — no superior anywhere ,on the line, 
from Colorado to Omaha to New York. They were in? on it, all of 
them, they were doing the same, they had given Mitchum the-4ead 
and the method. It was Dave Mitchum who now belonged on this 
railroad and he, Bill Brent, who did not. 

As Bill Brent had learned to see, by a single gJattce at a few 
numbers on a sheet of paper, the entire trackage of a] division— so 
he was now able to see the whole of his own life and the full price 
of the decision he was making. He had not fallen in (ove until he 

554 



was past his youth; he had been thirty-six when he had found the 
woman he wanted. He had been engaged to her for the last four 
years; he had had to wait, because he had a mother to support and 
a widowed sister with three children. He had never been afraid of 
burdens; because he had known his ability to carry them, and lie 
had never assumed an obligation unless he was certain that he could 
fulfill it. He had waited, he had saved his money, and now he had 
reached the time when he felt himself free to be happy. He was to 
be married in a few weeks, this coming June. He thought of it, as 
he sat at his desk, looking at Dave Mitchum, but the thought aroused 
no hesitation, only regret and a distant sadness — distant, because he 
knew that he could not let it be part of this moment. 

Bill Brent knew nothing about epistemology; but he knew that 
man must live by his own rational perception of reality, that he 
cannot act against it or escape it or find a substitute for it — and that 
there is no other way for him to live. 

He rose to his feet. “It’s true that so long as 1 hold this job, 

I cannot refuse to obey you.’’ he said. “But I can. if I quit. So 
I’m quitting/’ 

“You’re whatV' 

“I’m quitting, as of this moment.” 

“But you have no right to quit, you goddamn bastard! Don’t you 
know that? Don't you know that I’ll have you thrown in jail for it?” 

“If you want to send the sheriff for me in the morning. I'll be at 
home. I won't try' to escape. There's no place to go," 

Dave Mitchum was six-foot-two and had the build of a bruiser, 
but he stood shaking with fury and terror over the delicate figure of 
Bill Brent. “You can't quit! There’s a law against it! I've got a law! 
You can’t walk out on me! 1 won’t let you out! I won’t let you leave 
this building tonight!” 

Brent walked to the door. Will you repeat that order you gave 
me, in front of the others? No? Then I will.” 

As he pulled the door open. Mitchum’s list shot out, smashed into 
his face and knocked him down. 

The trainmaster and the road foreman stood in the open doorway. 

“He quit! ’ screamed Mitchum. “The yellow bastard quit at a time 
like this! He’s a law-breaker and a coward’” 

In the slow effort of rising from the floor, through the haze of 
blood running into his eyes, Bill Brent looked up at the two men. 
He saw that they understood, but lie saw the closed faces of men 
who did not want to understand, did not want to interfere and hated 
him for putting them on the spot in the name of justice. He said 
nothing, rose to his feet and walked out of the building. 

Mitchum avoided looking at the others. “Hey, you.” he called, 
jerking his head at, the night dispatcher across the room. “Come 
here. You’ve got to take over at once,” 

.With the door closed, he repeated to the boy the story of the 
Diesel at Fairmount, as he had given it to Brent, and the order to 
send the Comet through with Engine Number 306, if the boy did 
not hear from him in half an hour. The boy was in no condition to 
think, to speak or to understand anything: he kept seeing the blood 

555 



on the face of Bill Brent, who had been his idol, “Yes, sir/' he 
answered numbly. 

Dave Mitchum departed for Fairmount, announcing to every yard- 
man, switchman and wiper in sight, as he boarded the track motor 
car, that he was going in search of a Diesel for the Comet. 

The night dispatcher sat at his desk, watching the dock and the 
telephone, praying that the telephone would ring and let him hear 
from Mr. Mitchum. But the half-hour went by in silence, and when 
there were only three minutes left, the boy felt a terror he could not 
explain, except that he did not want to send that order. 

He turned to the trainmaster and the road foreman, asking hesi- 
tantly, “Mr. Mitchum gave me an order before he left, but 1 wonder 
whether I ought to send it, because 1 ... 1 don’t think it's right. He 
said — ” 

The trainmaster turned away, he felt no pity: the boy was about 
the same age as his brother had been. 

The road foreman snapped, “Do just as Mr, Mitchum told you. 
You're not supposed to think," and walked out of the room. 

The responsibility that James Taggart and Clifton Locey had 
evaded now rested on the shoulders of a trembling, bewildered boy. 
He hesitated, then he buttressed his courage with the thought that 
one did not doubt the good faith and the competence of railroad 
executives. He did not know that his vision of a railroad and its 
executives was that of a century ago. 

With the conscientious precision of a railroad man, iit the moment 
when the hand of the clock ended the half-hour, he signed his name 
to the order instructing the Comet to proceed with Engine Number 
306, and transmitted the order to Winston Station. 

Tlie station agent at Winston shuddered when he looked at the 
order, but he was not the man to defy authority He told himsell 
that the tunnel was not, perhaps, as dangerous as he thought. He 
told himself that the best policy, these days, was not to think. 

When he handed their copies of the order to the conductor and 
the engineer of the Cornet, the conductor glanced slowly about the 
room, from face to face, folded the slip of paper, put it into his 
pocket and walked out without a word. 

The engineer stood looking at the paper for a moment, then threw 
it down and said, “I’m not going to do it. And it it’s come to where 
this railroad hands out orders like this one, I’m not going to work 
for it, either. Just list me as having quit.” 

“But you can’t quit!" cried the station agent, “They'll arrest you 
for it!” 

“If they find me,” said the engineer, and walked out of the station 
into the vast darkness of the mountain night. ■ 

The engineer from Silver Springs, who had brought! in Number 
306, was sitting in a corner of the room. He chuckled and said, 
“He’s yellow.” 

The station agent turned to him. “Will you do it, Joe? Will you 
take the Comet?” 

Joe Scott was drunk. There had been a time when a railroad man, 
reporting for duty with any sign of intoxication, would have been 

556 



regarded as a doctor arriving for work with sores of smallpox: on his 
face. But Joe Scott was a privileged person. Three months ago, he 
had been fired for an infraction of safety rules, which had caused a 
major wreck; two weeks ago, he had been reinstated in his job by 
order of the Unification Board. He was a friend of Fred Kinnan; he 
protected Kinnan’s interests in his union, not against the employers, 
but against the membership. 

“Sure,” said Joe Scott. *T11 take the Comet. I’ll get her through, 
if 1 go fast enough.” 

The fireman of Number 306 had remained in the cab of his engine. 
He looked up uneasily, when they came to switch his engine to the 
head end of the Comet; he looked up at the red and green lights of 
the tunnel, hanging in the distance above twenty miles of curves. 
But he was a placid, amicable fellow, who made a good fireman with 
no hope of ever rising to engineer; his husky muscles were his only 
asset. He felt certain that his superiors knew what they were doing, 
so he did not venture any questions. 

The conductor stood by the rear end of the Comet, fie looked at 
the lights of the tunnel, then at the long chain of the Comet’s win- 
dows. A few windows were lighted, but most of them showed only 
the feeble blue glow of night lamps edging the lowered blinds. He 
thought that he should rouse the passengers and warn them. There 
had been a time when he had placed the safety of the passengers 
above his own, not by reason of love for his lellow men, but because 
that responsibility was part of his job, which he accepted and felt 
pride in fulfilling. Now, he felt a contemptuous indilference and no 
desire to save them. They had asked for and accepted Directive 
10--289, he thought, they went on living and daily turning away in 
evasion from the kind of verdicts that the Unification Board was 
passing on defenseless victims — why shouldn’t he now turn away 
from them? If he saved their lives, not one of them would come 
forward to defend him when the Unification Board would convict 
him for disobeying orders, for creating a panic, for delaying Mr. 
Chalmers, He had no desire to be a martyr for the sake of allowing 
people safely to indulge in iheir own irresponsible evil. 

When the moment came, he raised his lantern and signaled the 
engineer to start, 

“See?” said Kip Chalmers triumphantly to Lester Luck, as the 
wheels under their feet shuddered forward. "Fear is the only practi- 
cal means to deal with people,” 

The conductor stepped onto the vestibule of the last car. No one 
saw him as he went down the steps of the other side, slipped off the 
Uain and vanished into the darkness of the mountains. 

A switchman stood ready to throw the switch that would send the 
Comet from the siding onto the main track. He looked at the Comet 
as it came slowly toward him. It was only a blazing white globe with 
a beam stretching high above his head, and a jerky thunder trembling 
through the rail under his feet. He knew that the switch should not 
he thrown. He thought of the night, ten years ago, when he had 
risked his life in a flood to save a train from a washout. But he knew 
Ihat times had changed. In the moment when he threw the switch 

557 



and saw the headlight jerk sidewise, he knew that he would now 
hate his job for the rest of his life. 

The Comet uncoiled from the siding into a thin, straight line, and 
went on. into the mountains, with the beam of the headlight like an 
extended arm pointing the way, and the lighted glass curve of the 
observation lounge ending it off. 

Some of the passengers aboard the Comet were awake. As the 
train started its coiling ascent; they saw the small duster of Winston’s 
lights at the bottom of the darkness beyond their windows, then the 
same darkness, but with red and green lights by the hole of a tunnel 
on the upper edge of the windowpanes. The lights of Winston kept 
growing smaller, each time they appeared; the black hole of the 
tunnel kept growing larger. A black veil went streaking past the 
windows at times, dimming the lights: it was the heavy smoke trom 
the coal-burning engine. 

As the tunnel came closer, they saw, at the edge of the sky far to 
the south, in a void of space and rock, a spot ot living fire twisting 
in the wind. They did not know what it was and did not care to learn. 

It is said that catastrophes are a matter of pure chance, and there 
were those who would have said that the passengers of the Comet 
were not guilty or responsible for the thing that happened to them. 

The man in Bedroom A, Car No. 1 , was a professor of sociology 
who taught that individual ability is of no consequence, that individ- 
ual effort is futile, that an individual conscience is a useless luxury, 
that there is no individual mind or character or achievement, that 
everything is achieved collectively, and that it’s masses that count, 
not men. 

The man in Roomette 7, Car No. 2, was a journalist who wrote 
that it is proper and moral to use compulsion ‘Tor a good cause,” 
who believed that he had the right to unleash physical force upon 
others — to wreck lives, throttle ambitions, strangle desires, violate 
convictions, to imprison, to despoil, to murder — for the sake of what- 
ever he chose to consider as his own idea of ”a good cause,” which 
did not even have to be an idea, since he had never defined what 
he regarded as the good, but bad merely stated that he went by “a 
feeling” — a feeling unrestrained by any knowledge, since he consid- 
ered emotion superior to knowledge and relied solely on his own 
“good intentions” and on the power of a gun. 

The woman in Roomette 10, Car No. 3, was an elderly school 
teacher who had spent her life turning class after class of helpless 
children into miserable cowards, by teaching them that the will of 
the majority is the only standard of good and evil, that a majority 
may do anything it pleases, that they must not assert their own per- 
sonalities, but must do as others were doing. 

The man in Drawing Room B, Car No. 4, was a newspaper pub- 
lisher who believed that men are evil by nature and unfit for free- 
dom, that their basic interests, if left unchecked, are to lie, to rob 
and to murder one another — and, therefore, men must pc ruled by 
means of lies, robbery and murder, which must be made t^ie exclusive 
privilege of the rulers, for the purpose of forcing men to work, teach- 

558 



ing them to be moral and keeping them within the bounds of order 
and justice. 

The man in Bedroom H, Car No. 5, was a businessman who had 
acquired his business, an ore mine, with the help of a government 
loan, under the Equalization of Opportunity Bill. 

The man in Drawing Room A, Car No. 6, was a financial who 
had made a fortune by buying “frozen'’ railroad bonds and getting 
his friends in Washington to “de free/e” them. 

The man in Seat 5, C ar No. 7, was a worker who believed that he 
had “a right” to a job, whether his employer wanted him oi not. 

The woman in Roomette 6, Oar No. 8, was a lecturer who believed 
that, as a consumer, she had “a right” to transportation, whether the 
railroad people wished to provide it or not. 

The man in Roomette 2, Car No. 9, was a professor of economics 
who advocated the abolition of private property, explaining that in- 
telligence plays no part in industrial production, that man’s mind is 
conditioned by material tools, that anybody can run a factory or a 
railroad and it's only a matter of seizing the machinery 

The woman in Bedroom D, Car No 10, was a mother who had 
put her two children to sleep in the berth above her, carefully tucking 
them in. protecting them from dralts and jolts: a mother whose hus- 
band held a government job enforcing directives, which she defended 
by saying, “I don’t care, it’s only the rich that they hurt. After all, 

1 must think of my children.” 

The man in Roomette 3. Car No. II, was a sniveling little neurotic 
who wrote cheap little plays into which, as a social message, he 
inserted cowardly little obscenities to the effect that all businessmen 
were scoundrels. 

The woman in Roomette 9, Car No. 12, was a housewife who 
believed that she had the right to elect politicians, of whom she knew 
nothing, to control giant industries, of which she had no knowledge. 

The man in Bedroom F, Car No. 13, was a lawyer who had said, 
“Me? I’ll find a way to gel along under any political system.” 

The man in Bedroom A, Car No. 14. was a professor of philosophy 
who taught that there is no mind— how do you know that the tunnel 
is dangerous?* —no reality- -how can you prove that the tunnel ex- 
ists?— no logic — why do you claim that trains cannot move without 
motive power? — no principles — why should you be bound by the law 
of cause -and- effect ? — no rights — why shouldn't you attach men to 
their j<d>s by force? — no morality —what *$ moral about running a rail- 
road? — no absolutes — what difference does it make to you whether 
you live or die , anyway? He taught that we know nothing — why 
oppose the orders of your superiors?— that we can never be certain 
of anything — how do you know you're right? — that we must act on 
the expediency of the moment — you don't want to risk your job , 
do you? 

The man in Drawing Room B, Car No. 15, was an heir who had 
inherited his fortune, and who had kept repeating, “Why should 
Rearden be the only one permitted to manufacture Rearden Metal?*’ 

Tlie man in Bedroom A, Car No. 16 f was a humanitarian who had 
said, “The men of ability? 1 do not care what or if they are made to 

559 



suffer. They must be penalized in order to support the incompetent. 
Frankly, I do not care whether this is just or not. I take pride in not 
caring to grant any justice to the able, where mercy to the needy 
is concerned.” 

These passengers were awake; there was not a man aboard the 
train who did not share one or more of their ideas. As the train 
went into the tunnel, the flame of Wyatt’s Torch was the last thing 
they saw on earth. 

Chapter VIII BY OUR LOVE 

The sun touched the tree tops on the slope of the hill, and they 
looked a bluish-silver, catching the color of the sky. Dagny stood at 
the door of the cabin, with the first sunrays on her forehead and 
miles of forest spread under her feet. The leaves went down from 
silver to green to the smoky blue of the shadows on the road below. 
The light trickled down through the branches and shot upward in 
sudden spurts when it hit a clump of ferns that became a fountain 
of green rays. It gave her pleasure to watch the motion of the light 
over a stillness where nothing else could move. 

She had marked the date, as she did each morning, on the sheet 
of paper she had tacked to the wall of her room. The progression 
of the dates on that paper was the only movement in the stillness of 
her days, like the record kept by a prisoner on a desert island. This 
morning’s date was May 28. 

She had intended the dates to lead to a purpose, but she could 
not say whether she had reached it or not. She had come here with 
three assignments given, as orders, to herself: rest — learn to live with- 
out the railroad — get the pain out of the way. Get it out of the way, 
were the words she used. She felt as if she were tied to some 
wounded stranger who could be stricken at any moment by an attack 
that would drown her in his screams. She felt no pity for the stranger, 
only a contemptuous impatience; she had to fight him and destroy 
him, then her way would be clear to decide what she wished to do; 
but the stranger was not easy to fight. 

The assignment to rest had been easier. She found that she liked 
the solitude; she awakened in the morning with a feeling of confident 
benevolence, the sense that she could venture forth and be willing 
to deal with whatever she found. In the city, she had lived in chronic 
tension to withstand the shock of anger, indignation, disgust, con- 
tempt. The only danger to threaten her here was the simple pain of 
some physical accident; it seemed innocent and easy by comparison. 

The cabin was far from any traveled road; it had remained as her 
father bad left it. She cooked her meals on a wood-burning stove 
and gathered the wood on the hillsides. She cleared the brush from 
under her walls, she reshingled the roof, she repainted the |door and 
the frames of the windows. Rains, weeds and brush had fallowed 
the steps of what had once been a terraced path rising up the hill 
from the road to the cabin. She rebuilt it, clearing the tei^aces, re- 
laying the stones, bracing the banks of soft earth with wall? of boul- 

560 



ders. It gave her pleasure to devise complex systems of levers and 
pulleys out of old scraps of iron and rope, then to move weights of 
rock that were much beyond her physical power. She planted a few 
seeds of nasturtiums and morning glories, to see one spreading slowly 
over the ground and the other climbing up the tree trunks, to see 
them grow, to see progression and movement. 

The work gave her the calm needed; she had not noticed how she 
began it or why; she had started without conscious intention, but she 
saw it growing under her hands, pulling her forward, giving her a 
healing sense of peace. Then she understood that what she needed 
was the motion to a purpose, no matter how small or in what form* 
the sense of an activity going step by step to some chosen end across 
a span of time. The work of cooking a meal was like a dosed rircle, 
completed and gone, leading nowhere. But the work of building a 
path was a living sum, so that no day was left to die behind her, but 
each day contained all those that preceded it, each day acquired its 
immortality on every succeeding tomorrow. A circle, she thought, is 
the movement proper to physical nature, they say that there’s noth- 
ing but circular motion in the inanimate universe around us, but the 
straight line is the badge of man, the straight line of a geometrical 
abstraction that makes roads, rails and bridges, the straight line that 
cuts the curving aimlessness of nature by a purposeful motion from 
a start to an end. The cooking of meals, she thought, is like the 
feeding of coal to an engine for the sake of a great run, but what 
would be the imbecile torture of coaling an engine that had no run 
to make? It is not proper for man’s life to be a dreie, she thought, 
or a string of circles dropping off like zeros behind him— man’s life 
must be a straight line of motion from goal to farther goal, each 
leading to the next and to a single growing sum, like a journey down 
the track of a railroad, from station to station to — oh, stop ill 

Stop it — she told herself in quiet severity, when the scream of the 
wounded stranger was choked off — don’t think of that, don’t look 
too far, you like building this path, build it, don’t look beyond the 
loot of the hill. 

She had driven a few times to the store in Woodstock, twenty 
miles away, to buy supplies and food. Woodstock was a small huddle 
of dying structures, built generations ago for some reason and hope 
long since forgotten. There was no railroad to feed it, no electric 
power, nothing but a county highway growing emptier year by year. 

The only store was a wooden hovel, with spider-eaten corners and 
a rotted patch in the middle of the floor, eaten by the rains that 
came through the leaking roof. The storekeeper was a fat, pallid 
woman who moved with effort, but seemed indifferent to her own 
discomfort. The stock of food consisted of dusty cans with faded 
labels, some grain, and a few vegetables rotting in ancient bins out- 
side the door. ‘'Why don’t you move those vegetables out of the 
sun?” Dagny asked once. The woman looked at her blankly, as if 
unable to understand the possibility of such a question. ‘•'They’ve 
always been there,” she answered indifferently. 

Driving back to the cabin, Dagny looked up at a mountain stream 
that fell with ferocious force down a sheer granite wall* its spray 

561 



hanging like a mist of rainbows in the sun. She thought that one 
could build a hydroelectric plant, just large enough to supply the 
power for her cabin and for the town of Woodstock — Woodstock 
could be made to be productive — those wild apple trees she saw in 
such unusual numbers among the dense growth on the hillsides, were 
the remnants of orchards — suppose one were to reclaim them, then 
build a small spur to the nearest railroad — oh, stop it! 

"No kerosene today," the storekeeper told her on her next trip 
to Woodstock. "It rained Thursday night, and when it rains, the 
trucks can’t get through Fairfield gorge, the road’s flooded, and the 
kerosene truck won’t be back this way till next month." “If you 
know that the road gets flooded every time it rams, why don't you 
people repair it?" The woman answered, "The road’s always been 
that way." 

Driving back, Dagny stopped on the crest of a hill and looked 
down at the miles of countryside below. She looked at Fairfield gorge 
where the county road, twisting through marshy soil below the level 
of a river, got trapped m a crack between two hills. It would be 
simple to by-pass those hills, she thought, to build a road on the 
other side of the river — the people of Woodstock had nothing to do, 
she could teach them — cut a road straight to the southwest, save 
mites, connect with the state highway at the freight depot of- -oh, 
stop it! 

She put her kerosene lamp aside and sat in her cabin after dark 
by the light of a candle, listening to the music of a small portable 
radio. She hunted for symphony concerts and twisted the dial rapidly 
past whenever she caught the raucous syllables of a news broadcast; 
she did not want any news from the city. 

Don’t think of Taggart Transcontinental — she had told herself on 
her first night in the cabin — don't think of it until you’re able to 
hear the words as if they were "Atlantic Southern" or "Associated 
Steel.” But the weeks passed and no scar would grow over the 
wound. 

It seemed to her as if she were fighting the unpredictable cruelty 
of her own mind. She would lie in bed, drifting off to sleep — then 
find herself suddenly thinking that the conveyor belt was worn at 
the coaling station at Willow Bend, Indiana, she had seen it from 
the window of her car on her last trip, she must tell them to replace 
it or they — and then she would be sitting up in bed, crying. Stop 
it! — and stopping it, but remaining awake for the rest of that night 

She would sit at the door of the cabin at sunset and watch the 
motion of the leaves growing still in the twilight — then she would 
see the sparks of the fireflies rising from the grass, flashing on and 
off in every darkening comer, flashing slowly, as if holding one mo- 
ment’s warning — they were like the lights of signals winking at night 
over the track of a — Stop it! ; 

It was the times when she could not stop it that she dreaded, the 
times when, unable to stand up — as in physical pain, with no limit 
to divide it from the pain of her mind — she would fall dotyn on the 
floor of the cabin or on the earth of the woods and sit still; with her 
face pressed to a chair or a rock, and fight not to let herself scream 

562 



aloud, while they were suddenly as close to her and as real as the 
body of a lover: the two lines of rail going off to a single point in 
the distance — the front of an engine cutting space apart by means 
of the letters TT — the sound of the wheels clicking in accented 
rhythm under the floor of her car — the statue of Nat Taggart in the 
concourse of the Terminal. Fighting not to know them, not to feel 
them, her body rigid but for the grinding motion of her face against 
her arm, she would draw whatever power over her consciousness 
still remained to her into the soundless, toneless repetition of the 
words: Get it over with. 

There were long stretches of calm, when she was able to face 
her problem with the dispassionate clarity of weighing a problem in 
engineering. But she could find no answer. She knew that her desper- 
ate longing for the railroad would vanish, were she to convince her- 
self that it was impossible or improper. But the longing came from 
the certainty that the truth and the right were hers — that the enemy 
was the irrational and the unreal — that she could not set herself 
another goal or summon the love to achieve it, while her rightful 
achievement had been lost, not to some superior power, but to a 
loathsome evil that conquered by means of impotence. 

She could renounce the railroad, she thought; she could find con- 
tentment here, in this forest; but she would build the path, then 
reach (he road below, then rebuild the road — and then she would 
reach the storekeeper of Woodstock and that would be the end, and 
the empty white face staring at the universe in stagnant apathy would 
be the limit placed on her effort. Why? — she heard herself screaming 
aloud. There was no answer. 

Then stay here until you answer it, she thought. You have no 
place to go, you can’t move, you can t start grading a right-of-way 
until . . until you know enough to choose a terminal. 

There were long, silent evenings when the emotion that made her 
sit still and look at the unattainable distance beyond the fading light 
to the south, was loneliness for Hank Reardon. She wanted the sight 
of his unyielding face, the confident face looking at her with the hint 
of a smile. But she knew that she could not see him until her battle 
was won. His smile had to be deserved, it was intended for an adver- 
sary who traded her strength against his, not for a pain-beaten wretch 
who would seek relief in that smile and thus destroy its meaning. 
He could help*her to live; he could not help her to decide for what 
purpose she wished to go on living. 

She had felt a faint touch of anxiety since the morning when she 
marked “May 15" on her calendar. She had forced herself to listen 
to news broadcasts, once in a while; she had heard no mention of 
his name. Her fear for him was her last link to the city; it kept 
drawing her eyes to the horizon at the south and down to the road 
at the foot of the hill. She found herself waiting for him to come. 
She found herself listening for the sound of a motor. But the only 
sound to give her a futile start of hope at times, was the sudden 
crackle of some large bird’s wings hurtling through the branches into 
the sky: 

There was another link to the past, that still remained as an un- 

563 



solved question: Quentin Daniels and the motor that he was trying 
to rebuild. By June 1, she would owe him his monthly check. Should 
she tell him that she had quit, that she would never need that motor 
and neither would the world? Should she tell him to stop and to let 
the remnant of the motor vanish in rust on some such junk pile as 
the one where she had found it? She could not force herself to do 
it. It seemed harder than leaving the railroad. That motor, she 
thought, was not a link to the past: it was her last link to the future. 
To kill it seemed like an act, not of murder, but of suicide: her order 
to stop it would be her signature under the certainty that there was 
no terminal for her to seek ahead. 

But it is not true — she thought, as she stood at the door of her 
cabin, on this morning of May 28 — it is not true that there is no 
place in the future for a superlative achievement of man’s mind; it 
can never be true. No matter what her problem, this would always 
remain to her — this immovable conviction that evil was unnatural 
and temporary. She felt it more clearly than ever this morning: the 
certainty that the ugliness of the men in the city and the ugliness of 
her suffering were transient accidents — while the smiling sense of 
hope within her at the sight of a sun-flooded forest, the sense of an 
unlimited promise, was the permanent and the real. 

She stood at the door, smoking a cigarette. In the room behind 
her, the sounds of a symphony of her grandfather’s time were coming 
from the radio She barely listened, she was conscious only of the 
flow of chords that seemed to play an underscoring harmony for the 
flow of the smoke curving slowly from her cigarette, for the curving 
motion of her arm moving the cigarette to her lips once in a while. 
She dosed her eyes and stood still, feeling the rays of the sun on 
her body. This was the achievement, she thought — to enjoy this mo- 
ment, to let no memory of pain blunt her capacity to feel as she felt 
right now; so long as she could preserve this feeling, she would have 
the fuel to go on. 

She was barely aware of a faint noise that came through the music, 
like the scratching of an old record. The first thing to reach her 
consciousness was the sudden jerk of her own hand flinging the ciga- 
rette aside. It came in the same instant as the realization that the 
noise was growing louder and that it was the sound of a motor. Then 
she knew that she had not admitted to herself how much she had 
wanted to hear that sound, how desperately she had Waited for Hank 
Rearden. She heard her own chuckle — it was humbly, cautiously low, 
as if not to disturb the drone of revolving metal which was now the 
unmistakable sound of a car rising up the mountain road. 

She could not see the road — the small stretch under the arch of 
branches at the foot of the hill was her only view of it-^- but she 
watched the car’s ascenl by the growing, imperious strajn of the 
motor against the grades and the screech of the tires on cfirvcs. 

The car stopped under the arch of branches. She did not Recognize 
it — it was not the black Hammond, but a long, gray convertible. She 
saw the driver step out: it was a man whose presence here "could not 
be possible. It was Francisco d’Anconia. 

The shock she felt was not disappointment, it was more like the 

564 



sensation that disappointment would now be irrelevant. It was eager- 
ness and an odd, solemn stillness, the sudden certainty that she was 
facing the approach of something unknown and of the gravest 
importance. 

The swiftness of Francisco’s movements was carrying him toward 
the hill while he was raising his head to glance up. He saw her above, 
at the door of the cabin, and stopped. She could not distinguish the 
expression on his face. He stood still for a long moment, his face 
raised to her. Then he started up the hill. 

She felt — almost as if she had expected it — that this was a scene 
from their childhood. He was coming toward her, not running, but 
moving upward with a kind of triumphant, confident eagerness. No, 
she thought, this was not their childhood — it was the future as she 
would have seen it then, in the days when she waited for him as for 
her release from prison. It was a moment’s view of a morning they 
would have reached, if her vision of life had been fulfilled, if they 
had both gone the way she had then been so certain of going. Held 
motionless by wonder, she stood looking at him. taking this moment, 
not in the name of the present, but as a salute to their past. 

When he was close enough and she could distinguish his face, she 
saw the look of that luminous gaiety which transcends the solemn 
by proclaiming the great innocence of a man who has earned the 
right to be light-hearted. He was smiling and whistling some piece 
of music that seemed to flow' like the long, smooth, rising flight of 
his steps. The melody seemed distantly familiar to her, she felt that 
it belonged with this moment, yet she felt also that there was some- 
thing odd about it, something important to grasp, only she could not 
think of it now. 

“Hi. Slug!” 

“Hi, Frisco’” 

She knew — by the way he kicked at her, by an instant's drop of 
his eyelids dosing his eyes, by the brief pull of his head striving to 
lean back and tesist, by the faint, half-smiling, half-helpless relax- 
ation of his lips, by the sudden harshness of his arms as he seized 
her — that it was involuntary, that he had not intended it, and that it 
was irresistibly right for both of them. 

The desperate violence of the way he held her, the hurting pres- 
sure of his mouth on hers, the exultant surrender of his body to the 
touch of hers, were not the form of a moment’s pleasure — she knew 
that no physical hunger could bring a man to this — she knew that it 
was the statement she had never heard from him, the greatest confes- 
sion of love a man could make. No matter what he had done to 
wreck his life, this was still the Francisco d’Anconia in whose bed 
she had been so proud of belonging — no matter what betrayals she 
had met from the world, her vision of life had been true and some 
indestructible part of it had remained within him — and in answer to 
it, her body responded to his, her arms and mouth held him, confess- 
ing her desire, confessing an acknowledgment she had always given 
him and always would. 

Then .the rest of his years came back to her, with a stab of the 
pain of knowing that the greater his person, the more terrible his 

565 



guilt in destroying it. She pulled herself away from him, she shook 
her head, she said, in answer to both of them, “No.” 

He stood looking at her, disarmed and smiling. “Not yet. You have 
a great deal to forgive me, first. But I can tell you everything now.” 

She had never heard that low, breathless quality of helplessness 
in his voice. He was fighting to regain control, there was almost a 
touch of apology in his smile, the apology of a child pleading for 
indulgence, but there was also an adult’s amusement, the laughing 
declaration that he did not have to hide his struggle, .since it was 
happiness that he was wrestling with, not pain. 

She backed away from him; she felt as if emotion had flung her 
ahead of her own consciousness, and questions were now catching 
up with her, groping toward the form of words. 

“Dagny. that torture you’ve been going through, here, for the last 
month . . . answer me as honestly as you can ... do you think you 
could have borne it twelve >ears ago?” 

‘No.” she answered; he smiled. “Why do you ask that?” 

“To redeem twelve years of my life, which l won’t have to regret.” 

“What do you mean? And” -her questions had caught up with 
her — “and what do you know about my torture here?” 

“Dagny, aren’t you beginning to see that I would know everything 
about it?” 

“How did you . . . Francisco! What were you whistling when you 
were coming up the hill ?” 

“Why, was 1? I don’t know.” 

“It was the Fifth Concerto by Richard Halley, wasn’t it?” 

“Oh . . . !” He looked startled, then smiled in amusement at 
himself, then answered gravely, “I'll tell you that later,” 

“How did you find out where I was*>” 

“I'll tell you that, too.” 

“You forced it out of Eddie.” 

“I haven’t seen Eddie for over a year.” 

“He was the only one who knew it.” 

“It wasn’t Eddie who told me.” 

“I didn’t want anybody to find me ” 

He glanced slowly about him, she saw his eyes stop on the path 
she had built, on the planted flowers, on the fresh-shingled roof. He 
chuckled, as if he understood and as if it hurt him. “You shouldn’t 
have been left here for a month,” he said, “(iod, you shouldn’t have! 
It’s my first failure, at the one time when l didn’t want to fail. But 
I didn’t think you were ready to quit. Had I known it. 1 would have 
watched you dav and night.” 

“Really? What for?” 

“To spare you” — he pointed at her work— “all this.’ 

“Francisco.” she said, her voice low. “if you’re concerned about 
my torture, don’t you know that I don’t want to hear |ou speak of 
i U because — ” She stopped; she had never complained** to him, not 
in ail those years; her voice flat, she said only, “—that 1 don’t want 
to hear it?” 

“Because I’m the one man who has no right to speak 6f it? Dagny, 

566 



if you think that I don’t know how much I’ve hurt you, I’ll tell you 
about the years when I * , . But it’s over. Oh, darling, it’s overt” 

“Is it?” 

“Forgive me, I mustn’t say that. Not until you say it.” He was 
trying to control his voice, but the look of happiness was beyond his 
power to control 

“Are you happy because I’ve lost everything 1 lived for? All right, 
I’ll say it, if this is what you’ve come to hear; you were the first 
thing I lost — docs it amuse you now to see that I’ve lost the rest?” 

He glanced straight at her, his eyes drawn narrow by such an 
intensity of earnestness that the glance was almost a threat, and she 
knew that whatever the years had meant to him — “amusement” was 
the one word she had no right to utter. 

“Do you really think that?” he asked. 

She whispered, “No . . 

“Dagny, we can never lose the things we live for. We may have 
to change their form at times, if we’ve made an error, but the pur- 
pose remains the same and the forms are ours to make.” 

“Thai is what I’ve been telling myself foi a month. But there’s no 
way left open toward any purpose whatever.” 

He did not answer. He sat down on a boulder by the door of the 
cabin, watching her as if he did not want to miss a single shadow of 
reaction on her face. “What do you think now of the men who quit 
and vanished?” he asked. 

She shrugged, with a faint smile of helpless sadness, and sat down 
on the ground beside him. “You know,” she said. “ I used to think 
that there was some destroyer who came after them and made them 
quit. But 1 guess there wasn’t. There have been times, this past 
month, when I’ve almost wished he would come for me, too. But 
nobody came.” 

“No?” 

“No. I used to think, that he gave them some inconceivable reason 
to make them betray everything they loved. But that wasn’t neces- 
sary. I know how they felt. I can’t blame them any longer. What I 
don’t know is how they learned to exist afterward — if any of them 
still exist.” 

“Do you feel that you’ve betrayed Taggart Transcontinental?” 

“No. I ... I feel that I would have betrayed it by remaining 
at work.” 

“You would have.” 

“If 1 had agreed to serve the looters, it’s . . . it’s Nat Taggart 
that I would have delivered to them. 1 couldn’t. I couldn’t let his 
achievement, and mine, end up with the looters as our final goal,” 

“No, you couldn’t. Do you call this indifference? Do you think 
that you love the railroad less than you did a month ago?” 

“I think that I would give my life for just one more year on the 
railroad . . . But I can’t go back to it.” 

‘ “Then you know what they felt, all the men who quit, and what 
it was that they loved when they gave up.” 

“Francisco,” she asked, hot looking at him, her head bent, “why 
did you ask me whether L could have given it up twelve years ago?” 

567 



"‘Don’t you know what night I am thinking of, just as you are?' 1 

‘"Yes ...” she whispered. 

“That was the night I gave up d’Anconia Copper.'’ 

Slowly, with a long effort, she moved her head to glance up at 
him. His face had the expression she had seen then, on that next 
morning, twelve years ago: the look of a smile, though he was not 
smiling, the quiet look of victory over pain, the look of a man’s pride 
in the price he paid and in that which made it worth paying. 

“But you didn't give it up.” she said. “You didn't quit. You’re 
still the President of d’Anconia Copper, only it means nothing to 
you now.” 

“It means as much to me now as it did that night.” 

"Then how can you let it go to pieces 7 ” 

“Dagny, you're more fortunate than I. Taggart Transcontinental 
is a delicate piece of precision machinery. It will not last long without 
you. It cannot be run by slave labor. They will mercifully destroy it 
for you and you won't have to see it serving the looters. But copper 
mining is a simpler job. D’Anconia Copper could have lasted for 
generations of looters and slaves Crudely, miserably, ineptly — but it 
could have lasted and helped them to last. 1 had to destroy it myself,” 

“You — what?” 

“I am destroying d’Anconia Copper, consciously, deliberately, by 
plan and by my own hand. I have to plan it as carefully and work 
as hard as if l were producing a fortune — in order not to let them 
notice it and stop me, in order not to let them seize the mines until 
it is too late. All the effort and energy I had hoped to spend on 
d’Anconia Copper, I’m spending them, only . . . only it’s not to make 
it grow. I shall destroy every last bit of it and every last penny of 
my fortune and every ounce of copper that could feed the looters. 
1 shall not leave it as I found it — 1 shall leave it as Sebastian d’An- 
conia found it — then let them try to exist without him or me!” 

“Francisco!” she screamed. “How could you make yourself do it?” 

“By thtf grace of the same love as yours,” he answered quietly, 
“my love for d’Anconia Copper, for the spirit of which it was the 
shape. Was — and, some day, will be again.” 

She sat still, trying to grasp all the implications of what she now 
grasped only as the numbness of shock. In the silence, the music of 
the radio symphony went on. and the rhythm of the chords reached 
her like the slow, solemn pounding of steps, while she struggled to 
see at once the whole progression of twelve years: the tortured boy 
who called for help on her breasts — the man who sat on the floor 
of a drawing room, playing marbles and laughing at the destruction 
of great industries — the man who cried, “My love, I c^n’t!” while 
refusing to help her — the man who drank a toast, in the dim booth 
of a barroom, to the years which vSebasti^n d'Anconia^had had to 
wait. ... 

“Francisco ... of all the guesses I tried to make abo|n you ... I 
never thought of it ... I never thought that you were ^ne of those 
men who had quit . . .” 

“I was one of the first of them.” 

“I thought that they always vanished ...” 

568 



“Well, hadn't I? Wasn’t it the worst of what I did to you — that I 
left you looking at a cheap playboy who was not the Francisco 
d’Anconia you had known?” 

“Yes . . she whispered, “only the worst was that 1 couldn't 
believe it ... 1 never did ... It was Francisco d’Anconia that l kept 
seeing every time 1 saw you. . . .” 

“I know. And l know what it did to you. 1 tried to help you 
understand, but it was too soon to tell you. Dagny, if I had told 
you — that night or the day when you came to damn me for the San 
Sebastian Mines — that 1 was not an aimless loafer, that 1 was out to 
speed up the destruction of everything we had held sacred together, 
the destruction of d’Anconia Copper, of Taggart Transcontinental, 
ot Wyatt Oil, of Rearden Steel— would you have found it easier 
to take?” 

“Harder,” she whispered. “I’m not sure I can take it. even now. 
Neither your kind of renunciation nor my own . . . But, Francisco" — 
she threw her head back suddenly to look up at him — “if this was 
your secret, then of all the hell you had to take. 1 was — ” 

_Oli yes, my darling, yes, you were the worst of it!” It was a 
dtfsperate cry, its sound of laughter and of release confessing all the 
agony he wanted to sweep away. He seized her hand, he pressed his 
mouth to it. then his face, not to let her see the reflection of what 
his years had been like. “If it's any kind of atonement, which it 
isn’t . . . whatever 1 made you suffer, that’s how I paid for it ... by 
knowing what 1 was doing to you and having to do it . . . and watting, 
waiting to . . . But it’s over.” 

He laised his head, smiling, he looked down at her and she saw 
a look of protective tenderness come into his face, which told her 
of the despair he saw in hers. 

“Dagny, don’t think of that. 1 won t claim any suffering of mine 
as my excuse. Whatever my reason. I knew what 1 was doing and I’ve 
hurt you terribly I’ll need years to make up for it. Forget what” — she 
knew that he meant: what his embrace had confessed — “what 1 
haven’t said. Of all the things I have to tell you. that is the one I’ll 
sav last.” But his eyes, his smile, the grasp of his lingers on her wrist 
were saying it against his will. “You’ve borne too much, and there’s 
a great deal that you have to learn to understand in order to lose 
every scar of the torture you never should have had to bear. AH 
that matters now is that you’re free to recover. We’re free, both of 
us. we're free of the looters, we're out of their reach.” 

She said, her voice quietly desolate, “That’s what 1 came here 
for- -to try lo understand. But I can't. It seems monstrously wrong 
to surrender the world to the looters, and monstrously wrong to live 
under their rule. I can neither give up nor go back. I can neither 
exist without work nor work as a serf. I had always thought that any 
sort of battle was proper, anything, except renunciation. I’m not sure 
we’re right to quit, you and I, when we should have fought them. But 
there is no way to fight. It's surrender, if we leave— and surrender, if 
we remain. 1 don’t know what is right any longer.” 

“Check your premises, Dagny. Contradictions don’t exist.” 

“But I can't find any answer. I can’t condemn you for whal you’re 

569 



doing, yet it’s horror that I feel — admiration and horror, at the same 
time, You, the heir of the d’Anconias, who could have surpassed all 
his ancestors of the miraculous hand that produced, you're turning 
your matchless ability to the job of destruction. And 1— I’m playing 
with cobblestones and shingling a roof, while a transcontinental rail* 
road system is collapsing in the hands ot congenital ward heelers. 
Yet you and I were the kind who determine the fate of the world. 
If this is what we Jet it come to. then it must have been our own 
guilt. But I can't see the nature of our error. ” 

“Yes, Dagny, it was our own guilt." 

"Because we didn’t work hard enough?" 

"Because we worked too hard — and charged too little." 

"What do you mean?" 

"We never demanded the one payment that the world owed us — 
and we let our best reward go to the worst of men. The error was 
made centuries ago, it was made by Sebastian d’Anconia, by Nat 
Taggart, by every man who fed the world and received no thanks in 
return. You don't know what is right any longer? Dagny, this is not 
a battle over material goods. It's a moral crisis, the greatest the world 
has ever faced and the last. Our age is the climax ol centuries of 
evil. We must put an end to it, once and for all. or perish— we, the 
men of the mind. It was our own guilt. We produced the wealth of 
the world— but we let our enemies write its moral code." 

"But we never accepted their code. We lived by our own 
standards." 

"Yes — and paid ransoms for it! Ransoms in matter and in spirit — 
in money, which our enemies received, but did not deserve, and in 
honor, which we deserved, but did not receive. Ihai was our guilt — 
that we were willing to pay. We kept mankind alive, yet we allowed 
men to despise us and to worship our destroyers. We allowed them 
to worship incompetence and brutality, the recipients and the dis 
pensers of the unearned. By accepting punishment, not for any sms, 
but for out virtues, we betrayed our code and made theirs possible. 
Dagny, theirs is the morality of kidnappers. They use your love ol 
virtue as a hostage. They know that you’ll bear anything in order to 
work and produce, because you know that achievement is man's 
highest moral purpose, that he can’t exist without it, and your love 
of virtue is your love of life. They count on you to assume any 
burden. They count on you to feel that no effort is too great in the 
service of your love. Dagny, your enemies are destroying you by 
means of your own power. Your generosity and your endurance are 
their only tools. Your unrequited rectitude is the only hold they have 
upon you. They know it. You don’t. The day when you’ll discover 
it is the only thing they dread. You must learn to understand them. 
You won’t be free of them, until you do. But when y^u do, you’ll 
reach such a stage of rightful anger that you’ll blast ivery rail of 
Taggart Transcontinental, rather than let it serve themf’ 

"But to leave it to them!" she moaned. "To abandon it . . . To 
abandon Taggart Transcontinental . . . when it’s , . . it’l almost like 
a living person . . « 

"It was. It isn’t any longer. Leave it to them. It won't do them 

570 



any good. Let it go. We don’t need it. We can rebuild it. They can’t. 
We'll survive without it. They won’t.” 

■‘But nr, brought down to renouncing and giving up!” 

“Dagny, we who’ve been called ‘materialists’ by the killers ot the 
human spirit, we re the only ones who know how little value or 
meaning there is in material objects as such, because we'ie the ones 
who create their value and meaning. We can afford to give them up, 
(or a short while, in older to redeem something much more precious. 
We aie the soul, of which railroads, copper mines, steel mills and 
oil wells are the body- -and they are living entities that beat day and 
night, like our hearts, in the sacred function of supporting human 
life, but only so long as they remain our body, only so long as they 
remain the expression, the reward and the pioperty of achievement. 
Without us. they are corpses and their sole product is poison, not 
wealth or food, the poison of disintegration that turns men into 
hordes of scavengers. Oagny, learn to understand the nature of your 
own power and you’ll understand the paradox you now see around 
you. You do not have to depend on any material possessions, they 
depend on you, you create them, you own the one and only tool of 
production. Wherever you are, you will always be able to produce. 
But the looters— by their own stated theory — are in desperate, per- 
manent, congenital need and at the blind mercy of matter. Why don't 
\ou take them at their word? 1 hey need railroads, factories, mines, 
motors, which they cannot make or run. Of what use will your rail- 
road be to them without you? Who held it together** Who kept it 
alive? Who saved it. time and time again? Was it your brother 
James? Who fed him? Who fed the looters? Who produced their 
weapons? Who gave them the means to enslave you? The impossible 
spectacle of shabby little incompetents holding control over the prod- 
ucts of genius — who made it possible? Who supported your enemies, 
who forged your chains, who destroyed your achievement?” 

The motion that threw her upright was like a silent cry. He shot 
to hts feet with the stored abruptness of a spring uncoiling, his voice 
driving on in merciless triumph: 

“You’re beginning to see. aren’t you? Dagny! Leave them the 
carcass of that railroad, leave them all the rusted rails and rotted 
ties and gutted engines — but don't leave them your mind! Don’t 
leave them your mind’ The fate of the world rests on that decision!” 

“Ladies and gentlemen,” said the panic-pregnant voice of a radio 
announcer, breaking off the chords of the symphony, “we interrupt 
this broadcast to bring you a special news bulletin. The greatest 
disaster in railroad history occurred in the early hours of the morning 
on the main line of Taggart Transcontinental, at Winston. Colorado, 
demolishing the famous Taggart Tunnel!” 

Her scream sounded like the screams that had rung out in the one 
last moment in the darkness of the tunnel. Its sound remained with 
him through the rest of the broadcast — as they both ran to the radio 
m the cabin and stood, in equal terror, her eyes staring at the radio, 
hi,s eyes watching her face. 

“The details of the story were obtained from Luke Beal, fireman 
of the Taggart luxury main liner, the Comet, who was found uncon- 

571 



scious at the western portal of the tunnel this morning, and who 
appears to be the sole survivor of the catastrophe. Through some 
astounding infraction of safety rules— in circumstances not yet fully 
established — the Comet, westbound for San Francisco, was sent into 
the tunnel with a coal-burning steam locomotive. The Taggart run- 
nel, an eight-mile bore, cut through the summit of the Rocky Moun- 
tains and regarded as an engineering achievement not to be equaled 
in our time, was built by the grandson of Nathaniel Taggart, in the 
great age of the clean, smokeless Diesel-electric engine The tunnel's 
ventilation system was not designed to provide for the heavy smoke 
and fumes of coal-burning locomotives — and it was known to every 
railroad employee in the district that to send a train into the tunnel 
with such a locomotive would mean death by suffocation for every- 
one aboard. The Comet, none the less, was so ordered to proceed. 
According to Fireman Beal, the effects of the fumes began to be felt 
when the train was about three miles inside the tunnel. Engineer 
Joseph Scott threw the throttle wide open, in a desperate attempt 
to gam speed, but the old, worn engine was inadequate for the weight 
of the long train and the rising grade of the track. Struggling through 
the thickening fumes, engineer and fireman had barely managed to 
force the leaking steam boilers up to a speed of forty miles per 
hour — when some passenger, prompted undoubtedly by the panic of 
choking, pulled the emergency brake cord. The sudden jolt of the 
stop apparently broke the engine's airhose, for the train could not 
be started again. There were screams coming from the cars. Passen- 
gers were breaking windows. Engineer Scott struggled frantically to 
make the engine start, but collapsed at the throttle, overcome by the 
fumes. Fireman Beal leaped from the engine and ran. He was within 
sight of the western portal, when he heard the blast of the explosion, 
which is the last thing he remembers. The rest of the story was 
gathered from railroad employees at Winston Station. It appears that 
an Army Freight Special, westbound, carrying a heavy load of explo- 
sives, had* been given no warning about the presence of the Comet 
on the track just ahead. Both trains had encountered delays and 
were running off their schedules. It appears that the Freight Special 
had been ordered to proceed regardless of signals, because the tun- 
nel's signal .system was out of ordei . It is said that in spite of speed 
regulations and in view of the frequent breakdowns of the ventilating 
system, it was the tacit custom of all engineers to go full speed while 
in the tunnel. It appears, as far as can be established at present, that 
the Comet was stalled just beyond the point where the tunnel makes 
a sharp curve. It is believed that everyone aboard was dead by thai 
time. It is doubted that the engineer of the Freight Special, turning 
a curve at eighty miles an hour, would have been at$e to see, in 
time, the observation window of the Comet’s last caf, which was 
brightly lighted when it left Winston Station. What is known is that 
the Freight Special crashed into the rear of the Comet, 'fhe explosion 
of the Special’s cargo broke windows in a farmhouse fi^e miles away 
and brought down such a weight of rock upon the tunnel that rescue 
parties have not yet been able to cofnc within three titles of where 
either train had been. It is not expected that any survivors will be 

572 



found — and it is not believed that the Taggart Tunnel can ever be 
rebuilt.” 

She stood still. She looked as if she were seeing, not the room 
around her, but the scene in Colorado. Her sudden movement had 
the abruptness of a convulsion. With the single-tracked rationality 
of a somnambulist, she whirled to find her handbag, as if it were 
the only object in existence, she seized it, she whirled to the door 
and ran. 

“Dagny!” he screamed. “Don’t go back!” 

The scream had no more power to reach her than if he were calling 
to her across the miles between him and the mountains of Colorado. 

He ran after her, he caught her, seizing her by both elbows, and 
he cried, “Don’t go back! Dagny! In the name of anything sacred 
to you, don’t go back!” 

She looked as if she did not know who he was. In a contest of 
physical strength, he could have broken the bones of her arms with- 
out effort. But with the force of a living creature fighting for life, 
she lore herself loose so violently that she threw him off balance for 
a moment. When he regained his footing, she was running down the 
hill — running as he had run at the sound of the alarm siren in Rear- 
den’s mills — running to her car on the road below. 

* * 

His letter of resignation lay on the desk before him — and James 
Taggart sat staring at it. hunched by hatred. He felt as if his enemy 
were this piece of paper, not die words on it, but the sheet and the 
ink that had given the words a material finality. He had always re- 
garded thought and words as inconclusive, but a material shape was 
that which he had spent his life escaping: a commitment. 

He had not decided to resign -not really, he thought; he had dic- 
tated the letter for a motive which he identified to himself only as 
‘just in case.” The letter, he felt, was a torm of protection: but he 
had not signed it yet, and that was his protection against the protec- 
tion. The hatred was directed at whatever had brought him to feel 
that he would not be able to continue extending this process much 
longer. 

He had received word of the catastrophe at eight o'clock this 
morning; by noon, he had arrived at his office. An instinct that came 
from reasons which he knew, but spent his whole effort on not know- 
ing, had told him that he had to be there, this time. 

The men who had been his marked cards — in a game he knew 
how to play -were gone. Clifton Looey was barricaded behind the 
statement of a doctor who had announced that Mr. Locey was suffer- 
ing from a heait condition which made it impossible to disturb him 
at present. One of Taggart’s executive assistants was said to have 
left for Boston last night, and the other was said to have been called 
unexpectedly to an unnamed hospital, to the bedside of a father 
nobody had ever suspected him of having. There was no answer :U 
the home of the chief engineer. The vice-president in charge of pub- 
lic relations could not be found. 

Driving through the streets to his office, Taggart had seen the 
black letters of the headlines. Walking down the corridors of Taggart 

573 



Transcontinental . he had heard the voice of a speaker pouring from 
a radio in someone’s office, the % kind of voice one expects to hear 
on unlighted street comers: it was screaming demands for the nation- 
alization of the railroads. 

He had walked through the corridors, his steps noisy, in order to 
be seen, and hasty, in order not to be stopped for questions. He had 
locked the door of his office, ordering his secretary not to admit any 
person or phone call and to tell all comers that Mr, Taggart was busy. 

Then he sat at his desk, alone with blank terror. He felt as if he 
were trapped in a subterranean vault and the lock could never be 
broken again — and as if he were held on display in the sight of the 
whole city below, hoping that the lock would hold out for eternity. 
He had to be here, in this office, it was required of him, he had to 
sit idly and wait — wait for the unknown to descend upon him and 
to determine his actions — and the terror was both of who would 
come for him and of the fact that nobody came, nobody to tell him 
what to do. 

The ringing of the telephones in the outer office sounded like 
screams for help. He looked at the door with a sensation of malevo- 
lent triumph at the thought of all those voices being defeated by the 
innocuous figure of his secretary, a young man expert at nothing but 
the art of evasion, which he practiced with the gray, rubber limpness 
of the amoral. The voices, thought Taggart, were coining from Colo- 
rado, from every center of the Taggart system, from every office of 
the building around him. He was sale so long as he did not have to 
hear them. 

His emotions had dogged into a still, solid, opaque ball within 
him. which the thought of the men who operated the Taggart system 
could not pierce: those men were merely enemies to be outwitted. 
The sharper bites of fear came from the thought of the men on the 
Board of Directors; but his letter of resignation was his fire escape, 
which would leave them stuck with the lire. The sharpest tear came 
from the thought of the men in Washington. If they called, he would 
have to answer; his rubber secretary would know whose voices super- 
seded his orders. But Washington did not call. 

The fear went through him in spasms, once in a while, leaving his 
mouth dry. He did not know what he dreaded. He knew that it was 
not the threat of the radio speaker. What he had experienced at the 
sound of the snarling voice had been more like a terror which he 
felt because he was expected to feel it, a duty-teiror, something that 
went with his position, like well-tailored suits and luncheon speeches. 
But under it, he had fell a sneaking little hope, swift and lurtive like 
the course of a cockroach: it that threat took form, it would solve 
everything, save him from decision, save him from signing the 
letter ... he would not be President of Taggart Transcontinental 
any longer, but neither would anyone else . . . neitherf would any- 
one else. . . . 

He sat, looking down at his desk, keeping his eyes apd his mind 
out of focus. It was as if he were immersed in a pool of fcjg, struggling 
not to let it reach the finality of any form. That which exists possesses 
identity; he could keep it out of existence by refusing t^ identify it. 

574 



He did not examine the events in Colorado, he did not attempt 
to grasp their cause* he did not consider their consequences. He did 
not think The clogged ball of emotion was like a physical weight in 
his chest, filling his consciousness, releasing hint from the responsibil- 
ity of thought. The ball was hatred™ hatred as his only answer, ha- 
tred as the sole reality, hatred without object, cause, beginning or 
end, hatred as his claim against the universe, as a justification, as a 
right, as an absolute. 

The screaming of the telephones went on through the silence. He 
knew that those pleas for help were not addressed to him, but to an 
entity whose shape he had stolen. It was this shape that the screams 
were now tearing away from him: he felt as if the ringing ceased to 
be sounds and became a succession of slashes hitting his skull. The 
object of the hatred began to take form, as if summoned by the bells. 
The solid ball exploded within him and flung him blindly into action. 

Rushing out of the room, in defiance of all the faces around him, 
he went running down the halls to the Operating Department and 
into the anteroom of the Operating Vice-President's office. 

The door to the office was open, he saw the sky in the great 
windows beyond an empty desk. Then he saw the staff in the anteroom 
around turn, and the blond head of Eddie Willers in the glass cubby- 
hole. He walked purposefully straight toward Eddie Willers. he flung 
the glass door open and, from the threshold, in the sight and hearing 
of the room, he screamed: 

“Where is she?” 

Eddie Willers rose slowly to his feet and stood looking at Taggart 
with an odd kind of dutiful curiosity, as if this were one more phe- 
nomenon to observe among all the unprecedented things he had 
observed. He did not answer. 

“Where is she?” 

‘T cannot tell you.” 

“Listen, you stubborn little punk, this is no time for ceremony! If 
you’re trying to make me believe that you don't know where she is, 
I don’t believe you! You know it and you’re going to tell me, or I’ll 
report you to the Unification Board! I’ll sweai to them that you 
know it — then try and prove that you don’t!” 

There was a faint tone of astonishment in Eddie’s voice as he 
answered, “I’ve never attempted to imply that I don’t know where 
she is, Jim. I know it. But 1 won’t tell you.” 

Taggart's scream rose to the shrill, impotent sound that confesses 
a miscalculation: “Do you realize what you’re saying?” 

“Why, yes, of course.” 

“Will you repeat it” — he waved at (he room — “for these wit- 
nesses?” 

Eddie raised his voice a little, more in precision and clarity than 
in volume: “I know where she is. But I will not tell you.” 

“You’re confessing that you're an accomplice who’s aiding and 
abetting a deserter?” 

“If that’s what you wish to call it.” 

“But it’s a crime! It's a crime against the nation. Don’t you 
know that?” 


575 



“No,” 

“It’s against the law!” 

“Yes.” 

“This is a national emergency! You have no right to any private 
secrets! You’re withholding vital information! I’m the President of 
this railroad! I’m ordering you to tell me! You can’t refuse to obey 
an order! It's a penitentiary offense! Do you understand?” 

“Yes.” 

“Do you refuse?” 

“1 do.” 

Years of training had made Taggart able to watch any audience 
around him, without appearing to do so. He saw the tight, closed 
faces of the staff, faces that were not his allies. All had a look of 
despair, except the face of Eddie Willers. The “feudal serf’ of Tag- 
gart Transcontinental was the only one who seemed untouched by 
the disaster. He looked at Taggart with the lifelessly conscientious 
glance of a scholar confronted by a held of knowledge he had never 
wanted to study. 

“Do you realize that you're a traitor?” yelled Taggart. 

Eddie asked quietly, “To whom?” 

“To the people! It’s treason to shield a deserter’ It’s economic 
treason! Your duty to feed the people comes first, above anything 
else whatever! Every public authority has said so! Don't you know 
it? Don't you know what they’ll do to you?” 

“Don’t you see that I don't give a damn about that?” 

“Oh, you don’t? I’ll quote that to the Unification Board! 1 have 
all these witnesses to prove that you said — ” 

“Don’t bother about witnesses, Jim Don’t put them on the spot. 
I'll write down everything I said. I'll sign it, and you can take it U> 
the Board.” 

The sudden explosion of Taggart's voice sounded as il he had been 
slapped: “Who are you to stand against the government? Who are 
you, you miserable little office rat, to judge national policies and 
hold opinions of your own? Do you think the country has lime to 
bother about your opinions, your wishes or your precious little con 
science? You’re going to learn a lesson — all of you 1 -- all ol you 
spoiled, self-indulgent, undisciplined tittle two-bit clerks, who strut 
as if that crap about your rights was serious! You’re going to learn 
that these are not the days of Nat Taggart!” 

Eddie said nothing. For an instant, they stood looking at each 
other across the desk. Taggart’s lace was distorted by terror. Eddie's 
remained sternly serene. James Taggart believed the existence of an 
Eddie Willers too well; Eddie Willers could not believe the existence 
of a James Taggart. 

“Do you think the nation will bother about your wishes or hers?” 
screamed Taggart. “It’s her duty to come back! It’s her daty to work! 
What do we care whether she wants to work or not? W^ need her 1 ” 

“Do you, Jim?” 

An impulse pertaining to self-preservation made Tagjgart back a 
step away from the sound of that particular tone, a very quiet tone, 
in the voice of Eddie Willers. But Eddie made no move to follow. 

576 



He remained standing behind his desk, in a manner suggesting the 
civilized tradition of a business office. 

“You won’t find her,” he said. “She won’t be back. I’m glad she 
won’t. You can starve, you can clt>se the railroad, you can throw me 
in jail, you can have me shot — what does it matter? I won’t tell you 
where she is. If l see the whole country crashing, I won’t tell you. 
You won’t find her. You — ” 

They whirled at the sound of the entrance door flung open. They 
saw Dagny standing on the threshold. 

She wore a wrinkled cotton dress, and her hair was disheveled by 
hours of driving. She stopped for the duration of a glance around 
her, as if to recapture the place, but there was no recognition of 
persons in her eyes, the glance merely swept through the room, as 
if making a swift inventory of physical objects. Her face was not the 
lace they remembered; it had aged, not by means of lines, but by 
means of a still, naked look stripped of any quality save nithlessness. 

Yet their first response, ahead of shock or wonder, was a single 
emotion that went through the room like a gasp of relief. It was in 
all their faces but one; Eddie Willers, who alone had been calm a 
moment ago, collapsed with his face down on his desk; he made no 
sound, but the movements of his shoulders were sobs. 

Her face gave no sign of acknowledgment to anyone, no greeting, 
as if her presence here were inevitable and no words were necessary. 
She went straight to the door of her office; passing the desk of her 
secretary, she said, her voice like the sound ot a business machine, 
neither rude nor gentle, “Ask Eddie to come in.” 

James Taggart was the first one to move, as if dreading to let her 
out of his sight. He rushed in after her, he cried. “I couldn t help 
it!” and then, life returning to him. his own, his normal kind of life, 
he screamed. “It was your fault! You did it! You’re to blame for it! 
Because you left!” 

He wondered whether his scream had been an illusion inside his 
own ears. Her face remained blank; yet she had turned to him; she 
looked as if sounds had reached her. but not words, not the commu- 
nication of a mind. What he felt for a moment was his closest ap- 
proach to a sense of his own non-existence. 

Then he saw the faintest change in her face, merely the indication 
of perceiving a human presence, but she was looking past him and 
he turned and saw that Eddie Willers had entered the office. 

There were traces of tears in Eddie's eyes, but he made no attempt 
to hide them, he stood straight, as if the tears or any embarrassment 
or any apology for them were as irrelevant to him as to her 

She said, “Get Ryan on the telephone, tell him Pm here, then let 
me speak to him.” Ryan had been the general manager of the rail- 
road’s Central Region. 

Eddie gave her a warning by not answering at once, then said, his 
voice as even as hers, “Ryan’s gone, Dagny. He quit last week.” 

They did not notice Taggart, as they did not notice the furniture 
around them. She had not granted him even the recognition of order- 
ing him out of her office. Like a paralytic, uncertain of his muscles’ 
obedience, he gathered his strength and slipped out. But he was 

577 



certain of the first thing he had to do: he hurried to his office to 
destroy his letter of resignation. 

She did not notice his exit; she was looking at Eddie. “Is Knowland 
here?’' she asked. 

“No. He’s gone,” 

“Andrews?” 

“Gone.” 

“McGuire?” 

“Gone.” 

He went on quietly to recite the list of those he knew she would 
ask for, those most needed in this hour, who had resigned and van- 
ished within the past month. She listened without astonishment or 
emotion* as one listens to the casually list of a battle where all are 
doomed and it makes no difference whose names fall first. 

When he finished, she made no comment, but asked, “What has 
been done since this morning?” 

“Nothing.” 

“Nothing?” 

“Dagny, any office boy could have issued orders here since this 
morning and everybody would have obeyed him. But even the office 
boys know that whoever makes the first move today will be held 
responsible for the future, the present and the past — when the buck- 
passing begins. He would not save the system, he would merely lose 
his job by the time he saved one division. Nothing has been done, 
ft’s stopped still. Whatever is moving, is moving on anyone's blind 
guess — out on the line where they don’t know whether they’re to 
move or to stop. Some trains are held at stations, others are going 
on, waiting to be stopped before they reach Colorado. It's whatevei 
the local dispatchers decide. The Terminal manager downstaiis has 
cancelled all transcontinental traffic for today, including tonight’s 
Comet. I don’t know what the manager in San Francisco is doing. 
Only the^wrecking crews are working. At the tunnel. They haven't 
come anywhere near the wreck as yet. I don’t think they will.” 

“Phone the Terminal manager downstairs and tell him to put all 
transcontinental trains back on the schedule at once, including to- 
night's Comet. Then come back here.” 

When he came back, she was bending ovei the maps she had 
spread on a table, and she spoke while he made rapid notes: 

“Route all westbound trains south from Kirby, Nebraska, down 
the spur track to Hastings, down the track of the Kansas Western 
to Laurel, Kansas, then to the track of the Atlantic Southern at 
Jasper, Oklahoma. West on the Atlantic Southern to Flagstaff, Ari- 
zona, north on the track of the Flagstaff- Homedalc to Elgin. Utah, 
north to Midland, northwest on the track of the Wasatch Railway 
to Salt Lake City. The Wasatch Railway is an abandoned narrow- 
gauge. Buy it. Have the gauge spread to standard. If thp owners are 
afraid, since sales are illegal, pay them twice the njoneyland proceed 
with the work. There is no rail between Laurel, Kansai and Jasper, 
Oklahoma — three miles, no rail between Elgin and Midland, Utah — 
five and a half miles. Have the rail laid. Have constriction crews 
start at once — recruit every local man available, pay twice the legal 

578 



wages, three times, anything they ask -put three shifts on— and have 
the job done overnight For rail, tear up the sidings at Winston, 
Colorado, at Silver Springs, Colorado, at Ixeds, Utah, at Benson, 
Nevada. If any local stooges of the Unification Board come to stop 
the work — give authority to our local men, the ones you trust, to 
bribe thein. Don’t pul that through the Accounting Department, 
chaige it to me. I'll pay it. If they find some case where it doesn’t 
work, have them tell the stooge that Directive 10-289 does not pro- 
vide for local injunctions, that an injunction has to be brought against 
our headquarters and that they have to sue me , if they wish to 
stop us.” 

“Is that true?” 

“How do I know? How can anybody know? But by the time they 
untangle it and decide whatever it is they please to decide- -our track 
will be built.” 

“1 see.” 

‘Til go over the lists and give you the names of our local men to 
pul in charge — if they’re still there. By the time tonight’s Comet 
reaches Kirby, Nebraska, the track will be ready ft will add about 
thirty-six hours to the transcontinental schedule — but there will be a 
transcontinental schedule. Then have them get for me out of the 
files the old maps of our road as it was before Nat Taggart’s grandson 
built the tunnel.” 

“The . . . what?” He did not raise his voice, but the catch of his 
breath was the break of emotion he had wanted to avoid. 

Her face did not change, but ’a faint note in her voice acknowl- 
edged him, a note of gentleness, not reproof: “The old maps of the 
days before the tunnel. We’re going back, Eddie. Let’s hope wc can. 
No, we won’t rebuild the tunnel. There's no way to do it now. But 
(he old grade that crossed the Rockies is still there. It can be re- 
claimed. Only it will be hard to get the rail for it and the men to 
do it. Particularly the men.” 

He knew, as he had known from the first, that she had seen his 
tears and that she had not walked past in indifference, even though 
her clear, toneless voice and unmoving face gave him no sign of 
feeling. There was some quality in her manner, which he sensed but 
could not translate. Yet the feeling it gave him, translated, was as if 
she were saying to him: I know, 1 understand, I would feel compas- 
sion and gratitude, if we were alive and free to feel, but we’re not, 
are we, Eddie?— we’re on a dead planet, like the moon, where we 
must move, but dare not stop for a breath of feeling or we’ll discover 
that there is no air to breathe. 

“We have today and tomorrow to get things started,” she said. 
“I’ll leave for Colorado tomorrow night,” 

‘if you want to fly. I’ll have to rent a plane for you somewhere. 
Yours is still in the shops, they can’t get the parts for it.” 

“No, I’ll go by rail. I have to see the line. Iil take tomorrow’s 
Comet.” 

it was two hours later, in a brief pause between long-distance 
phone calls, that she asked him suddenly the first question which did 

579 



not pertain to the railroad; “What have they done to Hank 
Rearden?” 

Eddie caught himself in the small evasion of looking away, forced 
his glance back to meet hers, and answered, “He gave in. He signed 
their Gift Certificate, at the last moment.” 

“Oh.” The sound conveyed no shock or censure, it was merely a 
vocal punctuation mark, denoting the acceptance of a fact. “Have 
you heard from Quentin Daniels?” 

“No.” 

“He sent no letter or message for me?” 

“No.” 

He guessed the thing she leared and it reminded him of a matter 
he had not reported. “Dagny, there’s another problem that's been 
growing all over the system since you lett. Since May first. It's the 
frozen trains.” 

“The what?” 

“We’ve had trains abandoned on the line, on some passing track, 
in the middle of nowhere, usually at night™ with the entire crew 
gone. They just leave the train and vanish. There’s never any warning 
given or any special reason, it's more like an epidemic, it hits the 
men suddenly and they go. It’s been happening on other railroads, 
too. Nobody can explain it. But I think that everybody understands. 
It's the directive that’s doing it. It’s our men's form of protest. They 
try to go on and then they suddenly reach a moment when they 
can't take it any longer. What can we do about it?” He shrugged. 
“Oh well, who is John Galt?” 

She nodded thoughtfully; she did not look astonished. 

The telephone rang and the voice of her secretary said, “Mr. Wes- 
ley Mouch calling from Washington, Miss Taggart.” 

Her lips stiffened a little, as at the unexpected touch of an insect. 
“It must be for my brother,” she said. 

“No, Miss Taggart. For you.” 

“Ail right. Put him on.” 

“Miss Taggart,” said the voice of Wesley Mouch m the tone of a 
cocktail-partv host, “I was so glad to hear you’ve regained your 
health that I wanted to welcome you back in person. I know that 
your health required a long rest and I appreciate the patriotism that 
made you cut your leave of absence short in this terrible emergency. 
I wanted to assure you that you can count on our co-operation in 
any step you now find it necessary to take. Our fullest co-operation, 
assistance and support. If there are any . . . special exceptions you 
might require, please feel certain that they can be grafted.” 

She let him speak, even though he had made several small pauses 
inviting an answer. When his pause became long enoiigh, she said, 
U I would be much obliged if you would let me si>eak to Mr, 
Weatherby.” 

“Why, of course, Miss Taggart, any time you wish l . . why . . 
that is ... do you mean, nowT ’ 

“Yes. Right now.” 

He understood. But he said, “Yes, Miss Taggart.” 

580 



When Mr. Weatherby’s voice came on the wire, it sounded cau- 
tious: “Yes, Miss Taggart? Of what service can I be to you?” 

“You can tell your boss that if he doesn’t want me to quit again, 
as he knows I did, he is never to call me or speak to me. Anything 
your gang has to tell me, let them send you to tel! it. I’ll speak to 
you, but not to him. You may tell him that my reason is what he 
did to Hank Rearden when he was on Rearden’s payroll. If every- 
body else has forgotten it, I haven't.” 

“It is my duty to assist the nation’s railroads at any time. Miss 
Taggart.” Mr. Weatherby sounded as if he were trying to avoid the 
commitment of having heard what he had heard; but a sudden note 
of interest crept into his voice as he asked slowly, thoughtfully, with 
guarded shrewdness, “Ami to understand. Miss Taggart, that it is 
your wish to deal exclusively with me in all official matters? May 1 
take this as your policy?” 

She gave a brief, harsh chuckle. “Go ahead.” she said. “You may 
list me as your exclusive properly, use me as a special item of pull, 
and trade me all over Washington, But 1 don’t know what good that 
will do you, because I'm not going to play the game, I’m not going 
to trade favors. I’m simply going to start breaking your laws right 
now — and you can arrest me when you feel that you can afford to,” 

“I believe that you have an old-fashioned idea about law\ Miss 
Taggart. Why speak of rigid, unbreakable laws? Our modem law's 
ate elastic and open to interpretation according to . . circum- 
stances.” 

“'I hen start being elastic right now, because I'm not and neither 
are railroad catastrophes.” 

She hung up, and said to Tddie. in the tone of an estimate passed 
on physical objects. “They’ll leave us alone for a while.” 

She did not seem to notice the changes in her office: the absence 
ol Nat Taggart's portrait, the new glass coftee table where Mr. Locey 
had spread, for the benefit ol visitors, a display ol the loudest human- 
itarian magazines with titles of articles headlined on their covers. 

She heard * with the attentive look of a machine equipped to re- 
cord, not to react— Hddie's account of what one month had done to 
the railroad. She heard his report on what he guessed about the 
causes of the catastrophe. She faced, with the same look of detach- 
ment, a succession ot men who went in and out of her office with 
overhurried steps and hands fumbling in superfluous gestures. He 
thought that she had become impervious to anything. But suddenly — 
while pacing the office, dictating to him a list of track-laying materi- 
als and whole to obtain them illegally -she stopped and looked down 
at the magazines on the coffee table. Their headlines said: “The 
New Social Conscience,” “Our Duty to the Underprivileged," “Need 
versus Greed.” With a single movement of her arm. the abrupt, 
explosive movement of sheer physical brutality, such as he had never 
seen from her before, she swept the magazines off the table and 
went on, her voice reciting a list of figures without a break, as if 
theie were no connection between her mind and the violence of 
her body. 


581 



Late in the afternoon, finding a moment alone in her office, she 
telephoned Hank Rearden. 

She gave her name to his secretary — and she heard, in the way he 
said it, the haste with which he had seized the receiver: “Dagny?” 

“Hello, Hank. I’m back.” 

“Where?” 

“In my office.” 

She heard the things he did not say, in the moment’s silence on 
the wire, then he said, “I suppose I'd better start bribing people at 
once to get the ore to start pouring rail for you.” 

“Yes. As much of it as you can. It doesn’t have to be Rearden 
Metal. It can be — ” The break in her voice was almost too brief to 
notice, but what it held was the thought: Rearden Metal rail for 
going back to the time before heavy steeP — perhaps back to the 
lime of wooden rails with strips of iron? it can be steel, any weight, 
anything you can give me.” 

“All right. Dagny, do you know that I’ve surrendered Rearden 
Metal to them? Tve signed the Gift Certificate.” 

“Yes. I know.” 

“Tve given in.” 

“Who am 1 to blame you? Haven’t I?” He did not answer, and 
she said, “Hank. I don’t think they care whether there’s a train or 
a blast furnace left on earth. Wc do. They’re holding us by our love 
of it, and w'e’ll go on paying so long as there’s still one chance 
left to keep one single wheel alive and moving in token of human 
intelligence. We’ll go on holding it afloat, like our drowning child, 
and when the flood swallows it, we’ll go down with the last wheel 
and the last syllogism. 1 know what we’re paying, but — price is no 
object any longer.” 

“I know.” 

“Don’t be afraid for me, flank. I’ll be all right by tomorrow 
morning.” 

“I’ll never be afraid for you. darling. I’ll see you tonight.” 


Chapter IX THE FACE WITHOUT PAIN OR FEAR OR GUILT 

The silence of her apartment and the motionless perfection of objects 
that had remained just as she had left them a month before, struck 
her with a sense of relief and desolation together, when she entered 
her living room. The silence gave her an illusion of privacy and 
ownership; the sight of the objects reminded her that they were pre- 
serving a moment she could not recapture, as she could not undo 
the events that had happened since. 

There was still a remnant of daylight beyond the windows. She 
had left the office earlier than she intended, unable to iummon the 
effort for any task that could be postponed till morning. This was 
new to her — and it was new that she should now feel minre at home 
in her apartment than in her office. 

She took a shower, and stood for long, blank minutes, letting the 
water run over her body, but stepped out hastily when she realized 

582 



that what she wanted to wash off was not the dust of the drive from 
the country, but the feel of the office. 

She dressed, lighted a cigarette and walked into the living room, 
to stand at the window, looking at the city, as she had stood looking 
at the countryside at the start of this day. 

She had said she would give her life for one more year on the 
railroad. She was back; but this was not the joy of working: it was 
only the clear, cold peace of a decision reached — and the stillness of 
unadmitted pain. 

Clouds had wrapped the sky and had descended as fog to wrap 
the streets below, as if the sky were engulfing the city. She could 
see the whole of Manhattan Island, a long, triangular shape cutting 
into an invisible ocean. It looked like the prow of a sinking ship: a 
few tall buildings still rose above it, like funnels, but the rest was 
disappearing under gray-blue coils, going down slowly into vapor and 
space. This was how they had gone — she thought — Atlantis, the city 
that sank into the ocean, and all the other kingdoms that vanished, 
leaving the same legend in all the languages of men, and the same 
longing. 

She felt — as she had felt it one spring night, slumped across her 
desk in the crumbling olfice of the John Galt Line, by a window 
lacing a dark alley— the sense and vision of her own world, which 
she would never reach. . . You — she thought— whoever you are, 

v\hom 1 have always loved and never found, you whom I expected 
to see al the end ot the rails beyond the horizon, you whose presence 
I had always felt in the streets ot the city and whose world 1 had 
wanted to build, it is my love for you that had kept me moving, my 
love and my hope to reach you and my wish to be worthy of you 
on the day when l would stand before you face to face. Now l know 
that I shall never find you— that it is not to be reached or lived — 
but what is left of my life is still yours, and I wall go on in your 
name, even though it is a name I’ll never learn, I will go on serving 
you, even though I'm never to win. I will go on, to be worthy of 
you on the day when I would have met you. even though I won't. * . . 
She had never accepted hopelessness, but she stood at the window 
and, addressed to the shape of a fogbound city, it was her self- 
dedication to unrequited love. 

The doorbell rang. 

She turned with indifferent astonishment to open the door — but 
she knew that she should have expected him, when she saw that it 
was Francisco d'Anconia. She fell no shock and no rebellion, only 
the cheerless serenity of her assurance — and she raised her head to 
face him, with a slow, deliberate movement, as if telling him that 
she had chosen her stand and that she stood in the open. 

His face was grave and calm; the look of happiness was gone, but 
the amusement of the playboy had not returned. He looked as if all 
masks were down, he looked direct, tightly disciplined, intent upon 
a purpose, he looked like a man able to know the earnestness of 
actioh, as she had once expected him to look — he had never seemed 
so attractive as he did in this moment- -and she noted, in astonish- 

583 



meat, her sudden feeling that he was not a man who had deserted 
her, but a man whom she had deserted, 

“Dagny, are you able to talk about it now?” 

“Yes — if you wish. Come in.” 

He glanced briefly at her living room, her home which he had 
never entered, then his eyes came back to her. He was watching her 
attentively. He seemed to know that the quiet simplicity of her man- 
ner was the worst of all signs for his purpose, that it was like a 
spread of ashes where no flicker of pain could be revived, that even 
pain would have been a form of fire. 

“Sit down, Francisco.” 

She remained standing before him, as if consciously letting him 
see that she had nothing to hide, not even the weariness of her 
posture, the price she had paid for this day and her carelessness 
of price. 

“I don’t think 1 can stop you now,” he said, “if you’ve made your 
choice. But if there’s one chance left to stop you. it’s a chance I 
have to take.” 

She shook her head slowly. “There isn’t. And — what for, Fran- 
cisco? You’ve given up. What difference docs it make to you whether 
I perish with the railroad or away from it?” 

“I haven’t given up the future.” 

“What future?” 

“The day when the looters will perish, but we won’t.” 

“It Taggart Transcontinental is to perish with the looters, then so 
am 1.” 

He did not take his eyes otf her face and he did not answer. 

She added dispassionately, “I thought I could live without it. i 
can’t. Ill never try it again. Francisco, do you remember? — wc both 
believed, when we started, that the only sin on earth was to do things 
badly. 1 still believe it.” The first note of life shuddered in her voice. 
“I can’t stand by and watch what they did at that tunnel I can’t 
accept wjiat they're all accepting— Francisco, it’s the thing we 
thought so monstrous, you and 1! —the belief that disasters are one’s 
natural fate, to be borne, not fought. I can’t accept submission, 1 
can’t accept helplessness. 1 can’t accept renunciation. So long as 
there’s a railroad left to run. I’ll run it.” 

“In order to maintain the looters’ world?” 

“In order to maintain the last strip of mine ” 

“Dagny,” he said slowly, “l know why one loves one’s w'ork. I 
know what it means to you, the job of running trains. But you would 
not run them if they were empty. Dagnv, what is it you see when 
you think of a moving train?” 

She glanced at the city. “ I'he life of a man of ability who might 
have perished in that catastrophe, but will escape the neft one. which 
HI prevent — a man who has an intransigent mind and;an unlimited 
ambition, and is in love with his own life ... the kindjof man who 
is what we were when we started, you and 1, You gave him up. 
I can’t.” 

He dosed his eyes for an instant, and the tightening movement of 
his mouth was a smile, a smile substituting for a moan of understand- 

584 



ing, amusement and pain- He asked, his voice gravely gentle, “Do 
you think that you can still serve him — that kind of man—by running 
the railroad?” 

“Yes.” 

“All right, Dagny. I won’t try to stop you. So long as you still 
think that, nothing can stop you, or should. You will stop on the 
day when you’ll discover that your work has been placed in the 
service, not of that man's life, but of his destruction.” 

“Francisco!” It was a cry of astonishment and despair. “You do 
understand it, you know what I mean by that kind of man, you see 
him, too!” 

“Oh yes,” he said simply, casually, looking at some point in space 
within the room, almost as if he were seeing a real person. He added, 
“Why should you be astonished? You said that we were of his kind 
once, you and I. We still arc. But one of us has betrayed him.” 

“Yes,” she said sternly, “one of us has. We cannot serve him 
by i enunciation.” 

“We cannot serve him by making terms with his destroyers.” 

“I'm not making terms with them. They need me They know it. 
It's my terms that i'll make them accept.” 

“By playing a game in which they gain benefits in exchange for 
harming you?” 

“If 1 can keep Taggart transcontinental m existence, it's the only 
benefit 1 want. What do 1 care ii they make me pay ransoms? Let 
them have what they want. I'll have the railroad,” 

He smiled. “Do you think so? Do you think that theii need of 
»ou is your protection 7 Do you think that you can give them what 
they want? No, you won’t quit until you see. o! your own sight and 
judgment, what it is that they really want. You know, Dagny, we 
were taught that some things belong to God and others to Caesar. 
Perhaps their God would permit it. But the man vou say we’re serv- 
ing -he docs not permit it He permits no divided allegiance, no war 
between your mind and your body, no gulf between your values and 
Win actions, no tributes to Caesar He permits no Caesars.” 

“For twelve years.” she said sottly. *T would have thought it incon- 
ceivable that there might come a day when I would have to beg your 
lorgiveness on my knees Now 1 think it's possible. It I come to see 
Hi it vou're right. I will. But not until then.” 

“You will. But not on your knees.” 

He was looking at her. as if he were seeing her body as she stood 
before him, even Chough his eyes were directed at her face, and his 
i 1 lance told her what form of atonement and surrender he was seeing 
m the future. She saw the effort he made to look away, his hope 
that she had not seen his glance or understood it, his silent struggle, 
betrayed by the tension of a lew muscles under the skin of his face — 
trie face she knew so well. 

“Until then. Dagny, remember that we're enemies, l didn't want 
h> tell you this, but you’re the first person who almost stepped into 
heaven and came back to earth. You’ve glimpsed too much, so you 
have to know this clearly. It's you that I’m fighting, not your brother 
lames or Wesley Mouch. It's you that 1 have to deleat. 1 am out to 

585 



end all the things that are most precious to you right now. While 
you'll struggle to save Taggart Transcontinental. I will be working 
to destroy it. Don't ever ask me for help or money. You know my 
reasons. Now you may hate me— as. from your stand, you should." 

She raised her head a little, there was no perceptible change in 
her posture, it was no more than her awareness of her own body 
and of its meaning to him, but for the length of one sentence she 
stood as a woman, the suggestion of defiance coming only from the 
faintly stressed spacing of her words: “And what will it do to you?" 

He looked at her, in full understanding, but neither admitting nor 
denying the confession she wanted to tear from him. "That is no 
one's concern but mine," he answered. 

It was she who weakened, but realized, while saying it, that this 
was still more cruel: "I don't hate you. I’ve tried to. lor years, but 
1 never will, no matter what we do, either one of us." 

“I know it," he said, his voice low, so that she did not hear the 
pain, but felt it within herself as it by direct reflection from him. 

“Francisco!" she cried, in desperate defense of him against herselt. 
“How can you do what you're doing?" 

“By the grace of my love"— for you, said his eyes— “for the man," 
said his voice, “who did not perish in your catastrophe and who will 
never perish." 

She stood silently still lor a moment, as if in respectful acknow- 
ledgment. 

“I wish I could spare you what you’re going to go through." he 
said, the gentleness of his voice saying: It’s not me that you should 
pity. “But 1 can't. Every one of us has to travel that road by his 
own steps. But it’s the same road " 

“Where does it lead?" 

He smiled, as if softly closing a door on the questions that he 
would not answer. “To Atlantis," he said, 

“What?" she asked, startled. 

“Don’Uyou remember? — the lost city that only the spirits ot heroes 
can enter." 

The connection that struck her suddenly had been struggling in 
her mind since morning, like a dim anxiety she had had no time to 
identify. She had known it, but she had thought only ot his own fate 
and his personal decision, she had thought of him as acting alone. 
Now she remembered a wider danger and sensed the vast, undefined 
shape of the enemy she was facing. 

“You’re one of them," she said slowly, “aren’t you?" 

“Of whom?” 

“Was it you in Ken Danagger’s office?" 

He smiled. “No," But she noted that he did not ask what she 
meant. 

“Is there — you would know it— is there actually a destroyer loose 
in the world?" 

“Of course." 

“Who is it?" 

“You." 


586 



She shrugged; her face was growing hard. “The men who’ve quit, 
are they still alive or dead?” 

“They're dead— as far as you’re concerned. But there’s to he a 
Second Renaissance in the world. HI wait for it.” 

“No!” The sudden violence of her voice was m personal answer 
to him, to one of the two things he had wanted her to hear in his 
words. “No, don’t wait for me!” 

“I’ll always wait tor you, no matter what we do, either one of us.” 

The sound they heard was the turning of a key in the lock of the 
entrance door. The door opened and Hank Rearden came in. 

He stopped briefly on the threshold, then walked slowly into the 
living room, his hand slipping the key into his pocket. 

She knew that he had seen Francisco’s face before he had seen 
hers. He glanced at her, but his eyes came back to Francisco, as if 
this were the only face he was now able to see. 

It was at Francisco’s face that she was afraid to look. The effort 
she made to pull her glance along the curve of a few steps telt as if 
she were pulling a weight beyond her power. Francisco had risen to 
his feet, as if in the unhurried, automatic manner of a d’Anconia 
trained to the code of courtesy. There was nothing that Rearden 
could see in his taco. But what she saw in it was worse than she 
had feared. 

“What are you doing here?” asked Rearden, in the tone one 
would use to address a menial caught in a drawing rwm 

“I see that I ha\e no right to ask you the same question,” said 
ft an cisco. She knew what effort was rcquiied to achieve the clear, 
toneless quality of his voice. His eyes kept returning to Rearden’s 
light hand, as it he weie still seeing the key between his fingers. 

“Then answer it.” said Rearden. 

“Hank, any questions you wish to ask should be asked of me,” 
she said. 

Rearden did not seem to see or hear her. “Answer it” he 
repeated 

“There is only one answer which you would have the right to 
demand,” said Francisco, “so 1 will answer you that that is not the 
reason of my presence here.” 

“There is only one reason for your presence in the house of any 
woman,” said Rearden. “And I mean, any woman — as far as you're 
concerned Do you think that 1 believe it now, that confession of 
youis or anything you ever said to me?” 

“I have given you grounds not to trust me, but none to include 
Miss Taggart.” 

“Don't tell me that you have no chance here, never had and never 
will. 1 know it. But that 1 should find you here on the (irst — ” 

“Hank, if you wish to accuse me — ” she began, but Rearden 
whirled to her. 

“Ciod, no, Dagny, I don’t! But you shouldn’t be seen speaking to 
him. You shouldn't deal with him in any way. You don’t know him. 
I dp.” He turned to Francisco. “What are you after? Are you hoping 
to include her among your kind of conquests or — ” 

587 



“No!” It was an involuntary cry and it sounded futile, with its 
passionate sincerity offered — to be rejected — as its only proof. 

‘'No? Then are you here on a matter of business? Are you setting 
a trap, as you did for me? What sort of double-cross are you prepar- 
ing for her?” 

“My purpose . . . was not ... a matter of business.” 

“Then what was it?” 

“If you still care to believe me, l can tell you only that it involved 
no . . , betrayal of any kind.” 

“Do you think that you may still discuss betrayal, in my presence?” 

“I will answer you some day. 1 cannot answer you now.” 

“You don’t like to be reminded of it, do you? You've stayed away 
from me since, haven’t you? You didn’t expect to see me here? You 
didn’t want to face me?” But he knew that Francisco was lacing him 
as no one else did these days — he saw the eyes held straight to meet 
his, the features composed, without emotion, without defense or ap- 
peal, set to endure whatever was coming — he saw the open, unpro- 
tected look of courage — this was the face of the man he had loved, 
the man who had set him free of guilt — and he found himself lighting 
against the knowledge that this lace still held him, above all else, 
above his month of impatience for the sight of Dagny. ‘‘Why don’t 
you defend yourself, if you have nothing to hide? Why are you here? 
Why were you stunned to see me enter?” 

“Hank, stop it!” Dagny’s voice was a cry, and she drew back, 
knowing that violence was the most dangerous element to introduce 
into this moment 

Both men turned to her “Please let me be the one to answer,” 
Francisco said quietly. 

“I told you that 1 hoped I'd never see him again.” said Rcardcn. 
“I'm sorry if it has to be here. It doesn't concern you. but there's 
something he must be paid for.” 

“If that is . . . your purpose,” Francisco said with effort, “haven't 
you . . . achieved it already 9 ” 

“What's the matter?” Reardon's face was tro/en. Ins lips barely 
moving, but his voice had the sound of a chuckle. “Is this your way 
of asking for mercy?” 

The instant of silence was Francisco's strain to a greater el fort. 
“Yes . . if you wish.” he answered 

“Did you gram it when you held my future in your hands?” 

“You are justified in anything you wish to think of me. Bui since 
it doesn't concern Miss Taggart . . would you now permit me to 
leave?” 

“No! Do you want to evade it, like all those other cowards’* Do 
you want to escape?” 

“I will come anywhere you require any time you wish, feut [ would 
rather it were not in Miss Taggart’s presence.” 

“Why not? 1 want it to be in her presence, since thi^ is the one 
place you had no right to come. I have nothing left to protect from 
you, you’ve taken more than the looters can ever take, you’ve destroyed 
everything you've touched, but here is one thing you’re not going to 

588 



touch.” He knew that the rigid absence of emotion in Francisco’s 
face was the strongest evidence of emotion, the evidence of some 
abnormal effort at control — he knew that this was torture and that 
he, Rearden, was driven blindly by a feeling which resembled a tor- 
turer’s enjoyment except that he was now unable to tell whether he 
was torturing Francisco or himself. “You’re worse than the looters, 
because you betray with full understanding of that which you’re be- 
traying. 1 don’t know what form of corruption is your motive — but 
1 want you to learn that there are things beyond your reach, beyond 
your aspiration or your malice.” 

“You have nothing ... to fear from me , . , now.” 

“J want you to learn that you are not to think of her, not to look 
at her, not to approach her. Of all men, it’s you who Ye not to appear 
in her presence.” He knew that lie was driven by a desperate anger 
at his own leeling for this man, that the feeling still lived, that it was 
this tceling which he had to outrage and destroy. “Whatever your 
motive, it’s from any contact with you that she has to be protected.” 

if 1 gave you my word — ” He stopped. 

Rearden chuckled, “i know what they mean, your words, your 
convictions, your friendship and your oath by the only woman you 
ever — ” He stopped. They all knew what this meant, in the same 
instant that Rearden knew it. 

He made a step toward Francisco: he asked, pointing at Dagny, 
Ins voice low and strangely unlike his own voice, as if it neither came 
tiom nor were addressed to a living person, “Is this the woman 
>ou love?” 

Francisco closed his eyes. 

“Don't ask him that!” The cry was Dagny’s. 

is this the woman you love?” 

Francisco answered, looking at her, “Yes.” 

Rearden ’s hand rose, swept down and slapped Francisco’s face. 

The scream came from Dagny When she could see again— after 
an instant that felt as if the blow had struck her own cheek — Francis- 
co’s hands were the first thing she saw. llic heir oi the d’Anconias 
stood thrown back against a table, clasping the edge behind him, not 
to support himself, but to stop his own hands. She saw the rigid 
stillness of his body, a body that was pulled too straight but seemed 
broken, with the slight, unnatural angles of his waistline and shoul- 
ders, with his arms held stiff but slanted back — he stood as if the 
effort not to move were turning the force of his violence against 
himself, as if the motion he resisted were running through his mus- 
cles as a tearing pain. She saw his convulsed Fingers struggling to 
gmw fast to the table’s edge, she wondered which would break first, 
the wood of the table or the bones of the man, and she knew that 
Rearden's life hung in the balance. 

When her eyes moved up to Francisco’s face, she saw no sign of 
struggle, only the skin of his temples pulled tight and the planes of 
his cheeks drawn inward, seeming faintly more hollow than usual. It 
made his face look naked, pure and young. She felt terror because 
she was seeing in his eyes the tears which were not there. His eyes 
were brilliant and dry. He was looking at Rearden, but it was not 

589 



Rear den that he was seeing. He looked as if he were facing another 
presence in the room and as if his glance were saying: If this is whal 
you demand of me. then even this is yours, yours to accept and mine 
to endure, there is no more than this in me to offer you, hut let me 
be proud to know that 1 can offer so much. She saw — with a single 
artery beating under the skin of his throat, with a froth of pink in 
the corner of his mouth — the look of an enraptured dedication which 
was almost a smile, and she knew that she was witnessing Francisco 
d’Anconia’s greatest achievement. 

When she felt herself shaking and heard her own voice, it seemed 
to meet the last echo of her scream in the air of the room— and she 
realized how biief a moment had passed between. Her voice had the 
savage sound of rising to deliver a blow and it was crying to Rearden: 

" — to protect me from haul Long before you ever — ” 

"Don’t!"' Francisco’s head jerked to her, the brief snap of his voice 
held all of his unreleased violence, and she knew it was an order 
that had to be obeyed. 

Motionless but for the slow curve of his head, Francisco turned to 
Rearden. She saw his hands leave the edge of the table and hang 
relaxed by his sides. It was Rearden that he was now seeing, and 
there was nothing in Francisco’s face except the exhaustion of effort, 
but Rearden knew suddenly how much this man had loved him. 

“Within the extent of your knowledge,” Francisco said quietly, 
"you are right.” 

Neither expecting nor permitting an answer, he turned to leave. 
He bowed to Dagny, inclining his head in a manner that appeared 
as a simple gesture of leaving-taking to Rearden, as a gesture of 
acceptance to her. Then he left. 

Rearden stood looking after him, knowing — without context and 
with absolute certainty — that he would give his life for the powet 
not to have committed the action he had committed. 

When he turned to Dagny, his face looked drained, open and 
faintly attentive, as if he were not questioning her about the words 
she had cut off, but were waiting for them to come. 

A shudder of pity ran through her body and ended in the move- 
ment of shaking her head: she did not know for which of the two 
men the pity was intended, but it made her unable to speak and she 
shook her head over and over again, as if trying desperately to ne- 
gate some vast, impersonal suffering that had made them all its 
victims. 

"If there’s something that must be said, say it.” His voice was 
toneless. 

The sound she made was half-chuckle, half-moan — it was not a 
desire for vengeance, but a desperate sense of justice that drove the 
cutting bitterness of her voice, as she cried, consciously throwing the 
words at his face, "You wanted to know the name 0f that other 
man? The man I slept with? The man who had me Jfirst? It was 
Francisco d’Anconia!” 

She saw the force of the blow by seeing his face swept blank. She 
knew that if justice was her purpose, she had achieved it — because 
this slap was worse than the one he had dealt. 

590 



She felt suddenly calm, knowing lhat her words had had to he 
said for the sake of all three of them. The despair of a helpless 
victim left her, she was not a victim any longer, she was one of the 
contestants, willing to bear the responsibility of action. She stood 
facing him, waiting for any answer he would choose to give her, 
feeling almost as if it were her turn to be subjected to violence. 

She did not know what form of torture he was enduring, or what 
he saw being wrecked within him and kept himself the only one to 
see There was no sign of pain to give her any warning; he looked 
as if he were just a man who stood still in the middle of a room, 
making his consciousness absorb a fact that it refused to absorb. 
Then she noticed that he did not change his posture, that even his 
hands hung by his sides with the lingers half-bent as they had been 
lor a long time, it seemed to her that she could feel the heavy numb- 
ness at the blood stopping in his fingers — and this was the only clue 
to his suffering she was able to find, but it told her that that which 
he felt lelt him no power to teel anything else, not even the existence 
ol his own body. She waited, her pity vanishing and becoming 
i espect. 

Then she saw his eyes move slowly from her face down the length 
of her body, and she knew the soil of torture he was now choosing 
to experience, because it was a glance of a nature he could not hide 
Irom her. She knew that he was seeing her as she had been at seven- 
teen, he was seeing her with the rival he hated, he was seeing them 
together as they would be now, a sight he could neither endure nor 
icsist. She saw the protection of control dropping from his face, hut 
lie did not care whether he let her see his face alive and naked, 
because there now was nothing to icad in it except an unrevealing 
violence, some part of which resembled hatred. 

He seized her shoulders, and she felt prepared to accept that he 
would now kill her or beat her into unconsciousness, and m the 
moment when she felt certain that he had thought of it, she felt her 
body thrown against him and his mouth falling on hers, more brutally 
than the act ot a beating would have permitted. 

She tound herself, in terror, twisting her body to resist, and. in 
exultation, twisting her arms around him, holding him. letting her 
lips bring blood to his, knowing that she had never wanted him as 
she did in this moment. 

When he threw her down on the couch, she knew, to the rhythm 
of the heat of his body, that it was the act of his victory over his 
rival and of his surrender to him, the act of ownership brought to 
unendurable violence by the thought of the man whom it was defy- 
ing. the act of transforming his hatred for the pleasure that man had 
known into the intensity of his own pleasure, his conquest of that 
man by means of her body — she felt Francisco’s presence through 
Kearden's mind, she felt as if she were surrendering to both men, 
to that which she had worshipped in both of them, that which they 
held in common, that essence of character which had made of her 
love for each an act of loyalty to both. She knew also that this was 
his rebellion against the world around them, against its worship of 
degradation, against the long torment of his wasted days and lightless 

591 



struggle — this was what he wished to assert and, alone with her in 
the half-dark ness high in space above a city of ruins, to hold as the 
last of his property. 

Afterwards, they lay still, his face on her shoulder. The reflection 
of a distant electric sign kept beating in faint flashes on the ceiling 
above her head. 

He reached for her hand and slipped her fingers under his face to 
let his mouth rest against her palm for a moment, so gently that she 
felt his motive more than his touch. 

After a while, she got up, she reached for a cigarette, lighted it, 
then held it out to him with a slight, questioning lift of her hand; he 
nodded, still sitting half-stretched on the couch; she placed the ciga- 
rette between his lips and lighted another for herself. She felt a great 
sense of peace between them, and the intimacy of the unimportant 
gestures underscored the importance of the things they were not 
saying to each other. Everything was said, she thought — but knew 
that it waited to be acknowledged. 

She saw his eyes move to the entrance door once in a while and 
remain on it for long moments, as if he were still seeing the man 
who had left. 

He said quietly, “He could have beaten me by letting me have 
the truth, any time he wished. Why didn’t he?'* 

She shrugged, spreading her hands in a gesture of helpless sadness, 
because they both knew the answer. She asked, “He did mean a 
great deal to you. didn’t he?” 

“He does.” 

The two dots of fire at the tips of their cigarettes had moved 
slowly to the tips of their fingers, with the small glow of an occasional 
flare and the soft crumbling of ashes as sole movement in the silence, 
when the doorbell rang. They knew that it was not the man they 
wished but could not hope to see return, and she frowned with sud- 
den anger as she went to open the door. It look her a moment to 
remember that the innocuously courteous figure she saw bowing to 
her with a standard smile of welcome was the assistant manager of 
the apartment house. 

“Good evening. Miss Taggart. We're so glad to see you back. I 
just came on duty and heard that you had returned and wanted to 
greet you in person.” 

“Thank you.” She stood at the door, not moving to admit him. 

“I have a letter that came for you about a week ago. Miss Tag- 
gart,” he said, reaching into his pocket. “It looked as if it might be 
important, but being marked personal,’ it was obviously not in- 
tended to be sent to your office and, besides, they did not know 
yom address, either — so not knowing where to forward it, I kept it 
in our safe and I thought I’d deliver it to you in persori.” 

The envelope he handed to her was marked: Registered — Air 
Mail — Special Delivery — Personal. The return address sfcid: Quentin 
Daniels, Utah Institute of Technology, Afton, Utah. 

“Ob . . . Thank you.” 

The assistant manager noted that her voice went dropping toward 
a whisper, the polite disguise for a gasp, he noted th$t she stood 

592 



looking down at the sender’s name much longer than was necessary, 
so he repeated his good wishes and departed. 

She was tearing the envelope open as she walked toward Rearden, 
and she stopped in the middle of the room to read the letter. It was 
typewritten on thin paper — he could see the black rectangles of the 
paragraphs through the transparent sheets — and he could see her 
face as she read them. 

He expected it, by the time he saw her come to the end: she 
leaped to the telephone, he heard the violent whirl of the dial and 
her voice saying with trembling urgency, “Long-distance, please . . . 
Operator, get me the Utah Institute of Technology at Afton, Utah!” 

He asked, approaching. “What is it?” 

She extended the letter, not looking at him, her eyes fixed on the 
telephone, as if she could force it to answer. 

The letter said: 

Dear Miss Taggart: 

1 have fought it out for three weeks, 1 did not want to 
do it, l know how this will hit you and 1 know every argu- 
ment you could offer me. because 1 have used them all 
against myself -but this is to tell you that 1 am quitting. 

I cannot work under the terms of Directive 10-289- - 
though not for the reasons its perpetrators intended. 1 
know that their abolition of all scientific research does not 
mean a damn to you or me, and that you would want me 
to continue. But 1 have to quit, because 1 do not wish to 
succeed any longer. 

1 do not wish to work in a world that regards me as a 
slave. I do not wash to be ot any value to people. If 1 
succeeded in rebuilding the motor, I would not let you 
place it in their service. 1 would not take it upon my con- 
science that anything produced by my mind should be used 
to bring them comfort. 

I know that if we succeed, they will be only too eager 
to expropriate the motor. And for the sake of that pros- 
pect, w'e have to accept the position of criminals, you and 
I, and live under the threat of being arrested at any mo- 
ment at their whim. And this is the thing that 1 cannot 
take, even were I able to take all the rest: that in order 
to give them an inestimable benefit, we should be made 
martyrs to the men who, but for us, could not have con- 
ceived of it. 1 might have forgiven the rest, but when l 
think of this, I say: May they be damned, 1 will see them 
all die of starvation, myself included, rather than torgive 
them for this or permit it* 

To tell you the full truth, 1 want to succeed, to solve the 
secret of the motor, as much as ever. So l shall continue to 
work on it for my own sole pleasure and for as long as I 
last. But if 1 solve it, it will remain my private secret. 1 will 
.not release it for any commercial use. Therefore. 1 cannot 
take your money any longer. Commercialism is supposed 
593 



to be despicable, so all those people should truly approve 
of my decision, and I — I’m tired of helping those who de- 
spise me. 

I don't know how long I will last or what 1 will do in 
the future. For the moment, I intend to remain in my job 
at this Institute. But if any of its trustees or receivers 
should remind me that l am now legally forbidden to cease 
being a janitor, I will quit. 

You had given me my greatest chance and if I am now 
giving you a painful blow, perhaps I should ask you to 
forgive me. I think that you love your work — as much as 
I loved mine, so you will know that my decision was not 
easy to make, but that 1 had to make it. 

It is a strange feeling — writing this letter. I do not intend 
to die, but I am giving up the world and this feels like the 
letter of a suicide. So 1 want to say that of all the people 
I have known, you are the only person 1 regret leaving 
behind. 

Sincerely yours, 
Quentin Daniels 


When he looked up from the letter, he heard her saying, as he 
had heard her through the words of the typewritten lines, her voice 
rising closer to despair each time: 

“Keep ringing. Operator! . . . Please keep ringing! ' 

“What can you tell him?” he asked. “There are no arguments 
to offer.” 

“I won’t have a chance to tell him! He's gone by now. It was a 
week ago. I’m sure he’s gone. They’ve got him.” 

“Who got him?” 

“Yes. Operator, I’ll hold the line, keep trying!” 

“What would you tell him if he answered?” 

“I'd be'g him to go on taking my money, with no strings attached, 
no conditions, just so he’ll have the means to continue! I ll promise 
him that if we’re still in a looters’ world when and if he succeeds. I 
won't ask him to give me the motor or even to tell me its secret 
But if, by that time, we’re free—” She stopped. 

“If we're free . . 

“AH I want from him now is that he doesn't give up and vanish, 
like . . like all those others. I don’t want to let them get him If 
it’s not too late — oh God, 1 don’t want them to get him! . . . Yes. 
Operator, keep ringing!” 

“What good will it do us, even if he continues to work?” 

“That’s all I'll beg him to do— just to continue. Maybfc we’ll never 
get a chance to use the motor in the future. But I wj&nt to know 
that somewhere in the world there’s still a great brain work on a 
great attempt — and that we still have a chance at a future. ... If 
that motor is abandoned again , then there’s nothing but Starnesvillc 
ahead of us.” 

“Yes. I know,” 


594 



She held the receiver pressed to her ear, her arm stiff with the 
effort not to tremble. She waited, and he heard, in the silence, the 
futile clicking of the unanswered call. 

“He’s gone,” she said “They got him. A week is much longer 
than they need. I don’t know how they learn when the time is right, 
but this” -she pointed at the letter — “this was their time and they 
wouldn't have missed it.” 

“Who?” 

The destroyer’s agents.” 

“Are you beginning to think that they really exist?” 

“Yes.” 

“Arc you serious?” 

i am. I’ve met one of them.” 

“Who?” 

“I'll tell you later. 1 don’t know who their leader is, but I’m going 
lo find out, one of these days. I’m going to lind out. I’ll be damned 
if I let them — ” 

She broke off on a gasp; he saw the change in her face the moment 
before he heard the click of a distant receiver being lifted and the 
sound of a man’s voice saying, across the wire. “Hello?” 

“Daniels! Is that you? You’re alive? You’re still there 7 ” 

“Why, yes. Is this you. Miss Taggart? What’s the matter 7 ” 

“I .1 thought you were gone.” 

“Oh, I'm sorry. I just heard the phone ringing. I was out in the 
back lot, gathering carrots.” 

“Carrots?” She was laughing with hysterical relief. 

“I have my own vegetable patch out there. Used to be the Insti- 
tute's parking lot. Are you calling from New York, Miss Taggart?” 

“Yes. I just received your letter. Just now. I ... I had been away.” 

“Oh.” There was a pause, then he said quietly, “There's really 
nothing more to be said about it. Miss Taggart.” 

“Tell me, arc you going away?” 

“No.” 

“You're not planning to go?” 

“No. Where?” 

“Do you intend to remain at the Institute?” 

“Yes.” 

Tor how long? Indefinitely?” 

“Yes — as far as 1 know.” 

“Has anyone approached you?” 

“About what?” 

“About leaving.” 

“No. Who?” 

“Listen, Daniels, I won’t try to discuss your letter over the phone. 
But I must speak to you. Tm coming to see you. I'll get there as 
fast as 1 can.” 

“1 don’t want you to do that. Miss Taggart. I don’t want you to 
go to such an effort, when it’s useless.” 

“(Jive me a chance, won’t you? You don't have to promise to 
change your mind, you don’t have to commit yourself to anything— 
only to give me a hearing. If 1 want to come, it’s my risk. I’m taking 

595 



it. There are things I want to say to you. Pm asking you only for 
the chance to say them.” 

“You know that I will always give you that chance. Miss Taggart.” 

“I’m leaving for Utah at once. Tonight. But there’s one thing I 
want you to promise me. Will you promise to wait for me? Will you 
promise to be there when I arrive?” 

“Why ... of course. Miss Taggart. Unless I die or something 
happens outside my power — but I don’t expect it to happen.” 

“Unless you die, you will wait for me no matter what happens?” 

“Of course.” 

“Do you give me your word that you’ll wait?” 

“Yes, Miss Taggart.” 

“Thank you. Good night.” 

“Good night. Miss Taggart.” 

She pressed the receiver down and picked it up again in the same 
sweep of her hand and rapidly dialed a number. 

“Eddie? . . . Have them hold the Comet for me. . . . Yes, tonight’s 
Comet. Give orders to have my car attached, then come here, to my 
place, at once.” She glanced at her watch. “It's eight-twelve. 1 have 
an hour to make it. I don’t think I’ll hold them up too long. I’ll talk 
to you while 1 pack.” 

She hung up and turned to Rearden. 

“Tonight?” he said. 

“I have to.” 

“I guess so. Don't you have to go to Colorado, anyway 0 ” 

“Yes. I intended to leave tomorrow night. But 1 think Eddie can 
manage to take care of my office, and I’d belter start now'. It takes 
three days” — she remembered — “it will now take five days to reach 
Utah. 1 have to go by train, there are people 1 have to see on the 
line — this can’t he delayed, either.” 

“How long will you stay in Colorado?” 

“Hard to tell.” 

“Wire fine when you get there, will you? If it looks as if it’s going 
to be long. I’ll join you there.” 

This was the only expression he could give to the words he had 
desperately wished to say to her, had waited for, had come here to 
say. and now wished to pronounce more than ever, but knew that it 
must not be said tonight. 

She knew, by a faint, solemn stress in the tone of his voice, that 
this was his acceptance of her confession, his surrender, his forgive- 
ness. She asked, “Can you leave the mills?” 

“It will take me a few days to arrange, but I can.” 

He knew what her words were admitting, acknowledging and for- 
giving him, when she said, “Hank, why don’t you meet me in Colo- 
rado in a week? If you fly your plane, we’ll both get Jhere at the 
same time. And then we’ll come back together.” 

“All right . . . dearest.” 

* * t 

She dictated a list of instructions, while pacing her bclroom, gath- 
ering her clothes, hastily packing a suitcase. Rearden had left; Eddie 
Willers sat at her dressing table, making notes. He seemed to work 

5 % 



in his usual manner of unquestioning efficiency, as if he were not 
aware of the perfume bottles and powder boxes, as if the dressing 
table were a desk and the room were only an office. 

■Til phone you from Chicago, Omaha, Flagstaff and Afton,” she 
said, tossing underwear into the suitcase. “If you need me in be- 
tween, call any operator along the line, with orders to flag the train/* 

"The Comet?” he asked mildly. 

“Hell, yes! — the Comet.” 

*Okay.” 

"Don’t hesitate to call, if you have to.” 

"Okay. But 1 don't think I’ll have to.” 

"We’ll manage. Well work by long-distance phone, just as we did 
when we — ” She stopped. 

" -when we were building the John Galt Line?” he asked quietly. 
They glanced at each other, but said nothing else. 

■ What's the latest report on the construction crews?” she asked. 

"Everything’s under way. I got word, just after you left the office, 
that the grading gangs have started — out of Laurel. Kansas, and out 
ot Jaspci, Oklahoma. The rail is on its way to them from Silver 
Springs. It will be all right. The hardest thing to hnd was--” 

“Hie men?” 

"Yes. The men to put m charge. We had trouble out West, over 
the Elgin to Midland stretch. All the men we were counting on are 
gone I couldn’t find anyone able to assume responsibility, neither 
on our line nor elsewhere. I even tried to get Dan Conway, but — ” 
Dan Conway she asked, stopping. 

"Yes. 1 did. 1 tried. Do you remember how he used to have rail 
laid at the rate of live miles a day, right in that part of the country? 
Oh. 1 know he’d have reason to hate our guts, but what does it 
matter now 7 l found him— -he's living on a ranch out in Arizona. I 
plumed him myself and I begged him to save us. Just to lake charge, 
lor one night, of building five and a half miles of track. Five and a 
half miles, Dagny, that we're stuck with — and he's the greatest rail- 
road builder living! I told him that 1 was asking him to do it as a 
gesture of charity to us, if he would. You know, I think he under- 
stood me. He wasn’t angry. He sounded sad. But he wouldn’t do it. 
Me said one must not try to bring people back out of the gTave. . . . 
He wished me luck. I think he meant it. . . . You know, 1 don’t think 
he's ont of those that the destroyer knocked out. I think he just 
broke by himself.” 

"Yes. I know he did.” 

Eddie saw the expression on her face and pulled himself up hastily, 
"Oh, we finally found a man to put in charge at Elgin,” he said, 
forcing his voice to sound confident. “Don't worry, the track will be 
built long before you get there.” 

She glanced at him with the faint suggestion of a smile, thinking 
ot how often she had said these words to him and of the desperate 
bravery with which he was now trying to tell her: Don’t worry. He 
caught her glance, he understood and the answering hint of his smile 
had a touch of embarrassed apology. 

He turned back to his note pad, feeling anger at himself, sensing 

597 



that he had broken his own unstated commandment: Don’t make it 
harder for her. He should not have told her about Dan Conway, he 
thought; he should not have said anything to remind them both of 
the despair they would feel, if they felt. He wondered what was the 
matter with him: he thought it inexcusable that he should find his 
discipline slipping just because this w as a room, not an office. 

She went on speaking— -and he listened, looking down at his pad, 
making a brief notation once in a while. He did not permit himself 
to look at her again 

She threw the door of her closet open, jerked a suit off a hanger 
and folded it rapidly, while her voice went on with unhuuied pteci- 
sion. He did not look up. he was aware of her only by means ot 
sound: the sound of the swill movements and of the measured voice. 
He knew what was wrong with him, he thought; he did not want her 
to leave, he did not want to lose her again, after so brief a moment 
of reunion. But to indulge any personal loneliness, at a time when 
he knew how desperately the railroad needed her in Colorado, was 
an act of disloyalty he had never committed before — and he felt a 
vague, desolate sense of guilt. 

‘'Send out orders that the Comet is to stop at every division 
point, 7 ’ she said, “and that all division superintendents are to prepare 
tor me a report on — ” 

He glanced up— then his glance stopped and he did not hear the 
rest of the words. He saw a man’s dressing gown hanging on the 
back of the open closet door, a dark blue gown with the white initials 
HR on its breast pocket. 

He remembered where he had seen that gown before, he lernem 
bered the man facing him across a breakfast table in the Wayne - 
Falkland Hotel, he remembered that man corning, unannounced, to 
her office late on a Thanksgiving night —and the realization that he 
should have known it, came to him as two subterianean jolts of a 
single earthquake: it came with a feeling that screamed “No!” so 
savage!/ that the scream, not the sight, brought down every girder 
within him. ft was not the shock of the discovery, but the more 
terrible shock of what it made him discover about himself. 

He hung on to a single thought: that he must not let her see what 
he had noticed or what it had done to him. He fell a sensation of 
embarrassment magnified to the point of physical torture; it was the 
dread of violating her privacy twice; by learning her secret* and by 
revealing his own. He bent lower over the note pad and concentrated 
on an immediate purpose: to stop his pencil from shaking. 

*\ . . fifty miles of mountain trackage to build, and we can count 
on nothing but whatever material we own.” 

“I beg your pardon,” he said, his voice barely audible, “1 didn’t 
hear what you said.” 

“I said I want a report from ail superintendents on* every foot of 
rail and every piece of equipment available on their divisions.” 

“Okay,” 

”1 will confer with each of them in turn. Have thefn meet me in 
my car aboard the Comet.” 

“Okay,” 


598 



“Send word out — unofficially — that the engineers are to make up 
time for the stops by going seventy, eighty, a hundred miles an hour, 
anything they wish as and when they need to, and that 1 will . . . 
Eddie?” 

“Yes, Okay.’’ 

“Eddie, what’s the matter?” 

He had to look up, to face her and, desperately, to lie for the first 
lime in his life, *Tm . - . I’m afraid of the trouble we’ll gel into with 
the law,” he said, 

“Forget it. Don’t you see that there isn’t any law lelt? Anything 
goes now, for whoever can get away with it — and, for the moment, 
it s we who’re setting the terms.” 

When she was ready, he earned her suitcase to a taxicab, then 
down the plalfoim of the T aggart Terminal to her office car. the last 
at the end of the Comet He stood on the platform, saw the train 
jerk forward and watched the red markers on the back of her car 
slipping slowly away from him into the long darkness of the exit 
Uinnel. When they were gone, he felt what one leels at the loss of 
a dream one had not known till alter it was lost. 

There were tew people on the platform around him and they 
seemed to move with self-conscious strain, as if a sense of disaster 
dung to the rails and to the girders above their heads. He thought 
mditferentlY that utter a century of safety, men were once more 
regaiding the departure of a tram as an event involving a gamble 
with death. 

He remembered that he had had no dinner, and he felt no desire 
to cat. but the underground cafeteria ot the Taggart Terminal was 
more truly his home than the empty cube of space he now thought 
of as his apartment— so he walked to the cafeteria, because he had 
no other place to go. 

The cafeteria was almost deserted — but the first thing he saw, as 
he entered, was a thin column of smoke rising from the cigarette of 
the worker, who sat alone at a table in a dark corner 

Not noticing what he put on his tray. Eddie earned it to the work- 
er's table, said, “Hello,” sat down and said nothing else. He looked 
at the silverware spread before him, wondered about its purpose, 
lemembered the use of a fork and attempted to perform the motions 
of eating, but found that it was beyond his power. After a while, he 
looked up and saw that the worker’s eyes were studying him 
attentively. 

“No,” said Eddie, “no, there’s nothing the matter with me. . . , 
Oh yes, a lot has happened, but what difference does it make 
now? . . . Yes, she’s back. . . What else do you want me to say 
about it? . . . How did you know she’s back? Oh well, 1 suppose the 
*holc company knew it within the first ten minutes. . . . No, i don’t 
know whether I’m glad that she’s back, . . . Sure, she’ll save the 
ipilroad— for another year or month. . . , What do you want me to 
say? . . . No, she didn’t. She didn’t tell me what she’s counting on, 
She didn’t tell me what she thought or felt. . . . Well, how do you 
suppose she’d fed? It’s hell for her — all right, for me, tool Only my 
kind of hell is my own fault. . . . No. Nothing, I can’t talk about it — 

599 



talk? — 1 mustn’t even think about it. I’ve got to stop it, stop thinking 
of her and — of her, I mean.” 

He remained silent and he wondered why the worker’s eyes — the 
eyes that always seemed to see everything within him — made him 
feel uneasy tonight. He glanced down at the table, and he noticed 
the butts of many cigarettes among the remnants of food on the 
worker’s plate. 

“Are you in trouble, too?” asked Eddie “Oh, just that you’ve sat 
here for a long time tonight, haven’t you? . . . For me? Whv should 
you have wanted to wait for me? . . . You know. ] never thought 
you eared whether you saw me or not, me or anybody, you seemed 
so complete in yourself, and that's why 1 liked to talk to you, because 
1 felt that you always understood, but nothing could hurt you — you 
looked as if nothing had ever hurt you — and it made me feel free, 
as it ... as it there were no pain in the world. . . . Do you know 
what’s strange about your face? You look as if you've never known 
pain or fear or guilt. . . . I’m sorry I’m so late tonight. 1 had to see 
her off — she has just left, on the Comet. . . . Yes, tonight, just 
now. . . . Yes, she’s gone. . . . Yes. it was a sudden decision — within 
the past hour. She intended to leave tomorrow night, but something 
unexpected happened and she had to go at once. . . . Yes, she's 
going to Colorado — afterwards. . . To Utah — first. . . . Because she 
got a letter from Quentin Daniels that he’s quitting — and the one 
thing she won’t give up, couldn’t stand to give up. is the motor. You 
remember, the motor I told you about, the remnant that she 
found. . . . Daniels? He’s a physicist who’s been working lor the past 
year, at the Utah Institute of Technology, trying to solve the secret 
of the motor and to rebuild it. . . Why do you look at me like 
that? . . , No, 1 haven’t told you about him before, because it was a 
secret. It was a private, secret project of her own — and of what 
interest would it have been to you. anyway? ... 1 guess I can talk 
about it now, because he’s quit. . . Yes, he told her his reasons 
Ffe said that he won’t give anything produced by his mind to a world 
that regards him as a slave. FIc said that he won’t be made a martyr 
to people in exchange for giving them an inestimable benefit. . . . 
What — what are you laughing at? . . . Stop it, will you 7 Why do you 
laugh like that? . . . The whole secret? What do you mean, the whole 
secret? He hasn’t found the whole secret of the motor, if that’s what 
you meant, but he seemed to be doing well, he had a good chance. 
Now it’s lost. She’s rushing to him, she wants to plead, to hold him, 
to make him go on — but l think it’s useless. Once they stop, they 
don’t come back again. Not one of them has. . . . No. I don’t care, 
not any more, we’ve taken so many losses that I’m getting used to 
it . . , Oh no! It’s not Daniels that I can’t take, il’s~*no, drop it. 
Don’t question me about it. The whole world is going to*pieces, she’s 
still fighting to save it, and I — I sit here damning her f<^r something 
I had no right to know. . . . No! She’s done nothing tot be damned, 
nothing — and, besides, it doesn’t concern the railroad. . i . Don’t pay 
any attention to me, it’s not true, it’s not her that Fm damning, 
it*s myself. . . . Listen, I’ve always known that you loved Taggart 
Transcontinental as I loved it, that it meant something special to 

600 



you, something personal, and that was why you liked to hear me 
talk about it. But this — the thing I learned today— this has nothing 
to do with the railroad. It would be of no importance to you. Forget 
it. . . . It’s something that I didn’t know about her, that's all . . . J 
grew up with her. 1 thought 1 knew her. 1 didn't, ... I don’t know 
what it was that I expected, I suppose 1 just thought that she had 
no private life of any kind. To me, she was not a person and not . . . 
not a woman. She was the railroad. And I didn’t think that anyone 
would ever have the audacity to look at her in any other way. . . . 
Well, it serves me right. Forget it. . . . Forget it, I said! Why do you 
question me like this'* It’s only her private life. What can it matter 
to you? . . . Drop it. for God's sake! Don’t you see that I can't talk 
about it? . . . Nothing happened, nothing's wrong with me, I just — 
oh. why am I lying? 1 can't lie to you, you always seem to see 
everything, it's worse than trying to lie to myself! ... I have lied to 
myself. I didn’t know what I felt for her. The railroad? f’m a rotten 
hypocrite. If the railroad was all she meant to me, it wouldn’t have 
hit me like this. I wouldn't have telt that 1 wanted to kill him! . . . 
What’s the matter with you tonight? Why do you look at me like 
that? . . . Oh. what’s the matter with all of us? Why is there nothing 
but misery left for anyone? Why do we suffer so much? We weren’t 
meant to, I always thought that we were to be happy, all of us, as 
our natural fate. What are we doing? What have we lost** A year 
ago. I wouldn’t have damned her for finding something she wanted. 
But 1 know that they’re doomed, both of them, and so am l. and so 
is everybody, and she was all 1 had left. . . It was so great, to be 
alive, it was such a wonderful chance. I didn’t know that I loved it 
and that that was our love, hers and mine and yours- -but the world 
i> perishing and we cannot stop it. Why are we destroying ourselves? 
Who will tell us the truth? Who will save Oh. who is John 

Galt?! . . . No, it’s no use. It doesn’t matter now Why should l feel 
anything? We won’t last much longer Why should I care what she 
does? Why should I care that she's sleeping with Hank Reardeit? , . . 
Oh Ciod! —what’s the matter with you? Don’t go! Where are you 
going?’’ 

Chapter X THE SIGN OF THE DOLLAR 

She sat at the window of the train, her head thrown back, not mov- 
ing, wishing she would never have to move again. 

The telegraph poles went racing past the window, but the train 
seemed lost in a void, between a brown stretch of prairie and a solid 
spread of rusty, graying clouds. The twilight was draining the sky 
without the wound of a sunset; it looked more like the fading of an 
anemic body in the process of exhausting its last drops of blood and 
Jight. The train was going west, as if it, too. were pulled to follow 
the sinking rays and quietly to vanish from the earth. She sat still, 
feeling no desire to resist it. 

She wished she would not hear the sound of the wheels. They 
knocked in an even rhythm, every fourth knock accented — and it 

601 



seemed to her that through the rapid, running clatter of some futile 
stampede to escape, the beat of the accented knocks was like the 
steps of an enemy moving toward some inexorable purpose. 

She had never experienced it before, this sense of apprehension 
at the sight of a prairie, this feeling that the rail was only a fragile 
thread stretched across an enormous emptiness, like a worn nerve 
ready to break. She had never expected that she, who had felt as if 
she were the motive power aboard a train, would now sit wishing, 
like a child or a savage, that this train would move, that it would 
not stop, that it would get her there on time — wishing it, not like an 
act of will, but like a plea to a dark unknown. 

She thought of what a difference one month had made. She had 
seen it in the laces of the men at the stations. The track workers, 
the switchmen, the yardmen, who had always greeted her, anywhere 
along the line, their cheerful grins boasting that they knew who she 
was — had now looked at her stonily, turning away, their faces wary 
and closed. She had wanted to cry to them in apology. “It’s not I 
who’vc done it to you!” — then had remembered that she had ac- 
cepted it and that they now had the right to hate her. that she was 
both a slave and a driver of slaves, and so was every human being 
in the country', and hatred was the only thing that men could now 
feel for one another. 

She had found reassurance, for two days, m the sight of the cities 
moving past her window -the factories, (he bridges, the electric 
signs, the billboards pressing down upon the roofs of homes — the 
crowded, grimy, active, living conflux of the industrial East. 

But the cities had been left behind. The train was now diving into 
the prairies oi Nebraska, the rattle of its couplers sounding as if it 
were shivering with cold: She saw lonely shapes that had been farm- 
houses in the vacant stretches that had been fields. But the great 
burst of energy, in the East, generations ago, had splattered bright 
trickles to^run through the emptiness; some were gone, but some 
still lived. She was startled when the lights of a small town swept 
across her car and. vanishing, left it daiker than it had been before. 
She would not move to turn on the light. She sat still, watching the 
rare towns, Whenever an electric beam went flashing briefly at hei 
face, it was like a moment’s greeting 

She saw them as they went by, written on the walls of modest 
structures, over sooted roofs, down slender smokestacks, on the 
curves of tanks: Reynolds Harvesters — Macey Cement— Quinlan & 
Jones Pressed Alfalfa — Home of the Crawford Mattress — Benjamin 
Wylie Grain and Feed — words raised like flags to the empty darkness 
of the sky. the motionless forms of movement, of effort, of courage, 
of hope, the monuments to how much had been achieved on the 
edge of nature’s void by men who had once been free achieve — 
she saw the homes built in scattered privacy, the smaB shops, the 
wide streets with electric lighting, like a few luminous strokes criss- 
crossed on the black sheet of the wastelands — she saw the ghosts 
between, the remnants of towns, the skeletons of factories with crum- 
bling smokestacks, the corpses of shops with broken panes, the slant- 
ing poles with shreds of wire— she saw a sudden blaze, the rare sight 

602 



of a gas station, a glittering white island of glass and metal under 
the huge black weight of space and sky — she saw an ice-cream cone 
made of radiant tubing, hanging above the coiner of a street, and a 
battered car being parked below, with a young boy at the wheel and 
a girl stepping out, her white dress blowing in the summer wind — 
she shuddered lor the two of them, thinking: 1 can't look at you, i 
who know what it has taken to give you vour youth, to give you this 
evening, this car and the ice-cieam cone you're going to buy for a 
tjuarler- - she saw, on the edge beyond a town, a building glowing 
with tiers of pale blue light, the industrial light she loved, with the 
silhouettes of machines in its windows and a billboard in the darkness 
above its roof- and suddenly her head fell on her arm. and she sat 
shaking, crying soundlessly to the night, to herself, to whatever was 
human in any living being: Don’t let it go! . . . Don't let it go! . . . 

She jumped to her feet and snapped on the light. She stood still, 
lighting to regain control, knowing that such moments were her 
greatest danger. The lights of the town were past, her window was 
now an empty rectangle, and she heard, in the silence, the progres- 
Mon of the fourth knocks, the steps of the enemy moving on, not to 
he hastened or stopped. 

In desperate need of the sight of some living activity, she decided 
she would not order dinner in her car, but would go to the diner. 
As if stressing and mocking her loneliness, a voice came hack to her 
mind: “But you would not run trains if they were empty.” Forget 
it! — she told herself angrily, walking hastily to the door of her car. 

She was astonished, approaching her vestibule, to hear the sound 
of voices close by. As she pulled the door open, she heard a shout: 
(let off, God damn you!" 

An aging tramp had taken refuge in the corner of her vestibule. 
He sat on the floor, his posture suggesting that he had no strength 
left to stand up or to care about being caught. He was looking at 
the conductor, his eyes observant, fully conscious, but devoid of any 
reaction. The train was slowing down for a bad stretch of track, the 
conductor had opened the door to a cold gust of wind, and was 
waving at the speeding black void, ordering, “Get going! Get off as 
you got on or I'll kick you off head first!" 

ITiere was no astonishment in the tramp’s face, no protest, no 
anger, no hope, he looked as if he had long since abandoned any 
judgment of any human action. He moved obediently to rise, his 
hand groping upward along the rivets of the car's wait. She saw him 
glance at her and glance away, as if she were merely another inani- 
mate fixture of the train. He did not seem to be aware of her person, 
any more than of his own, he was indifferently ready to comply with 
an order which, in his condition, meant certain death. 

She glanced at the conductor. She saw nothing in his face except 
the blind malevolence of pain, of some long-repressed anger that 
broke out upon the first object available, almost without conscious- 
ness of the object’s identity. The two men were not human beings 
to each other any longer. 

The tramp's* suit was a mass of careful patches on a doth so 
stiff and shiny with wear that one expected it to crack like glass 

603 



if bent; but she noticed the collar of his shirt: it was bone-while 
from repeated laundering and it still preserved a semblance of 
shape. He had pulled himself up to his feet, he was looking indiffer- 
ently at the black hole open upon miles of uninhabited wilderness 
where no one would see the body or hear the voice of a mangled 
man, but the only gesture of concern he made was to tighten his 
grip on a small, dirty bundle, as tf to make sure he would not lose 
it in leaping off the tram. 

It was the laundered collar and this gesture for the last of his 
possessions — the gesture of a sense ot properly — that made her teel 
an emotion like a sudden, burning iwist within her. “Wait,” she said. 

The two men turned to her. 

“l.et him be my guest,” she said to the conductor, and held her 
door open for the tramp, ordering, “Come in.” 

The tramp followed her, obeying as blankly as he had been about 
to obey the conductor. 

He stood in the middle of her car. holding his bundle, looking 
around him with the same observant, unreacting glance. 

“Sit down,” she said 

He obeyed — and looked at her, as if waiting for further orders. 
There was a kind of dignity in his manner, the honesty of the open 
admission that he had no claim to make, no plea to offer, no ques- 
tions to ask, that he now had to accept whatever was done to him 
and was ready to accept it. 

He seemed to be in his early fifties; the structure of his bones and 
the looseness of his suit suggested that he had once been muscular 
The lifeless indifference of his eyes did not fully hide that they had 
been intelligent; the wrinkles cutting his lace with the record of some 
incredible bitterness, had not fully erased the fact that the face had 
once possessed the kindliness peculiar to honesty. 

“When did you eat last?” she asked. 

“Yesterday,” he said, and added, “I think.” 

She rang for the porter and ordered dinner for two, to be brought 
to her car from the diner. 

The tramp had watched her silently, but when the porter departed, 
he offered the only payment it was in his power to otter: “I don't 
want to get you in trouble, ma’am,” he said. 

She smiled. “What trouble?” 

“You’re traveling with one of those railroad tycoons, aren't you?” 

“No, alone.” 

“Then you're the wife of one of them?” 

“No.” 

“Oh.” She saw his effort at a look of something like respect, as 
if to make up tor having forced an improper confession, and she 
laughed. 

“No, not that, cither. I guess I’m one of the tycoons* myself. My 
name is Dagny T aggart and I work for this railroad.” 

“Oh ... I think I’ve heard of you, ma’am — in the did days.” It 
was hard to tell what “the old days” meant to him, whether it was 
a month or a year or whatever period of time had passed since he 
had gtven up. He was looking at her with a sort of interest in the 

604 



past tense, as if he were thinking that there had been a time when 
he would have considered her a personage worth seeing. “You were 
the lady who ran a railroad,’ 1 he said. 

“Yes,” she said. “I was.” 

He showed no sign of astonishment at the fact that she had chosen 
to help him. He looked as if so much brutality had confronted him 
that he had given up the attempt to understand, to trust or to ex- 
pect anything. 

“When did you get aboard the train?” she asked. 

“Back at the division point, ma’am. Your door wasn’t locked.” 
He added, “1 figured maybe nobody would notice me till morning 
on account of it being a private car.” 

“Where are you going?” 

“I don’t know.” Then, almost as if he sensed that this could sound 
too much like an appeal for pity, he added, “I guess f just wanted 
to keep moving till 1 saw some place that looked like there might 
be a chance to find work there.” This was his attempt to assume the 
responsibility of a purpose, rather than to throw the burden of his 
aimlessness upon her mercy — an attempt of the same order as his 
shirt collar. 

“What kind of work are you looking for?” 

“People don’t look for kinds of work any more, ma’am,” he an- 
swered impassively. “They just look for work.” 

“What sort of place did you hope to find?” 

“Oh . . . well . . . where there’s factories, J guess ” 

“Aren't you going in the wrong direction for that? The factories 
arc in the East.” 

“No.” He said it with the firmness ol knowledge. “ There are loo 
many people in the East. The factories are too well watched. I fig- 
ured there might be a better chance some place where there's fewer 
people and less law.” 

“Oh, running away? A fugitive from the law, arc you?” 

“Not as you’d mean it in the old davs, ma’am. But as things are 
now. I guess I am. I want to work.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“ There aren't any jobs back East. And a man couldn’t give you a 
job, it he had one to give — he'd go to jail for it. He’s watched. You 
can't get work except through the Unification Board. The Unification 
Board has a gang of its own friends waiting in line for the jobs, 
more friends than a millionaire’s got relatives. Well, me — 1 haven't 
got either.” 

“Where did you work last?” 

“I’ve been bumming around the country for six months— -no, 
longer, J guess — I guess it’s closer to about a year-1 can't tell any 
more- -mostly day work it was. Mostly on farms But it's getting to 
he no use now. I know how the farmers look at you — they don't like 
to see a man starving, but they’re only one jump ahead of starvation 
themselves, they haven’t any work to give you, they haven’t any 
food, and whatever they save, if the lax collectors don't get it, then 
the raiders do — you know, the gangs that rove all through the coun- 
try — deserters, they call them.” 

605 



“Do you think that it's any better in the West?"’ 

“No. 1 don’!.' 1 

“Then why are you going there?” 

“Because 1 haven't tried it before. That’s all there is left to try. 
ft's somewhere to go. Just to keep moving , . . You know,” he added 
suddenly, “1 don't think it will be any use. But there’s nothing to 
do in the East except sit under some hedge and wait to die. I don’t 
think I d mind it much now, the dying. I know it would be a lot 
easier. Only I think that it's a sin to sit down and let your life go, 
without making a try for it.” 

She thought suddenly of those modern college-infected parasites 
who assumed a sickening air of moral self-righteousness whenever 
they uttered the standard bromides about their concern for the wel- 
fare of others. The tramp’s last sentence was one of the most pro- 
foundly moral statements she had ever heard; but the man did not 
know it; he had said it in his impassive, extinguished voice, simply, 
dryly, as a matter of fact. 

“What part of the country do you come from?” she asked. 

“Wisconsin,” he answered. 

The waiter came m, bringing their dinner. He set a table and 
courteously moved two chairs, showing no astonishment at the na- 
ture of the occasion. 

She looked at the table; she thought that the magnificence of a 
world where men could afford the time and the effortless concern 
for such things as starched napkins and tinkling ice cubes, offered 
to travelers along with their meals for the price of a few dollars, was 
a remnant of the age when the sustenance ot one's life had not been 
made a crime and a meal had not been a matter of running a race 
with death — a remnant which was soon to vanish, like the white 
filling station, on the edge of the weeds of the jungle 

She noticed that the tramp, who had lost the strength to stand up, 
had not lost the respect tor the meaning of the things spread before 
him. He did not pounce upon the food; he fought to keep his move- 
ments slow, to unfold his napkin, to pick up his iork in tempo with 
hers, his hand shaking — as if he still knew that this, no matter what 
indignity was ever forced upon them, was the manner proper to men. 

“What was your line of work — in the old days?” she asked, when 
the waiter left. “Factories, wasn’t it?” 

“Yes, ma’am ” 

“What trade?” 

“Skilled lathe -operator.' 1 

“Where did you work at it last?” 

“In Colorado, ma’am. For the Hammond Car Company ” 

“Oh . . r 

“Ma’am?” 

“No, nothing. Worked there long?” 

“No, ma’am. Just two weeks.” 

“How come?” * 

“Well, l’d waived a year lor it, hanging around Colorado just to 
gel Vital job. They had a wailing Ust loo, the Hammond Car Com- 
pany, only they didn’t go by friendships and they didn’t go by senior- 

606 



ity, they went by a man's record: I had a good record. But it was 
just two weeks after I got the job that Lawrence Hammond quit. He 
quit and disappeared. They closed the plant, Afterwards, there was 
a citizens’ committee that reopened it. I got called back. But five 
days was all it lasted. They started layoffs just about at once. By 
seniority. So l had to go. 1 heard they lasted for about three months, 
the citizens’ committee. Then they had to close the plant for good/’ 

“Where did you work before that?” 

“Just about in every Eastern state, ma’am. But it was never more 
than a month or two. The plants kept dosing.” 

“Did that happen on every job you’ve held?” 

He glanced at her, as if he understood her question. “No, ma’am.” 
he answered and, for the first time, she caught a taint echo of pride 
in his voice. “The first job I had, l held it for twenty years. Not the 
same job, but the same place, I mean — 1 got to be shop foreman. 
That was twelve years ago. Then the owner of the plant died, and 
the heirs who took it over, ran it into the ground. Times were bad 
then, but it was since then that things started going to pieces every- 
where faster and faster. Since then, it seems like anywhere l turned — 
the place cracked and went. At first, we thought it was only one 
state ot another. A lot of us thought that Colorado would last. But 
it went, too. Anything you tried, anything you touched — it fell. Any- 
where you looked, work was stopping the factories were stopping — 
the machines were stopping — ” he added slowly, tn a whisper, as if 
seeing some secret terror of his own, "the motors . . . were . . . 
stopping.” His voice rose: “Oh God, who is--” and broke off 

“ — John Galt?” she asked 

“Yes,” he said, and shook his head as if to dispel some vision, 
“only I don't like to say that ” 

“1 don’t, either, I wish l knew why people are saymg it and who 
started it.” 

“'Hiat's it. ma'am. That's what I’m afraid ot. it might have been 
me who started it.” 

"What?” 

“Me or about six thousand others. We might have. I think we did 
I hope we’re wrong.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“Well, there was something that happened at that plant where I 
worked for twenty years U was when the old man died and his heirs 
took over. There were three of them, two sons and a daughter, and 
they brought a new plan to run the factory. They let us vote on it, 
too, and everybody — almost everybody — voted for it. We didn’t 
know. We thought it was good. No, that’s not true, either. We 
thought that we were supposed to think it was good. The plan was 
that everybody in the factory would work according to his ability, 
but would be paid according to his need. We— what’s the matter, 
ma'am? Why do you look like that?” 

“What was the name of the factory?” she asked, her voice barely 
audible. 

“The Twentieth Century Motor Company, ma'am, of Starnes- 
vifte, Wisconsin.” 


607 



“Go on.” 

“We voted for that plan at a big meeting, with ail of us present, 
six thousand of us, everybody that worked in the factory, The Starnes 
heirs made long speeches about it, and it wasn't too clear, but no- 
body asked any questions. None of us knew just how the plan would 
work, but every one of us thought that the next fellow knew it. And 
if anybody had doubts, he felt guilty and kept his mouth shut — 
because they made it sound like anyone who’d oppose the plan was 
a child-killer at heart and less than a human being. They told us that 
this plan would achieve a noble ideal. Well, how were we to know 
otherwise? Hadn’t we heard it all our lives — from our parents and 
our schoolteachers and our ministers, and m every newspaper we 
ever read and every movie and every public speech? Hadn’t we 
always been told that this was righteous and just? Well, maybe there’s 
some excuse for what we did at that meeting. Still, we voted for the 
plan — and what we got, wc had it coming to us. You know, ma’am, 
we are marked men, in a way. those of us who lived through the four 
years of that plan in the Twentieth Century factory. What is it that 
hell is supposed to be? Evil — plain, naked, smirking evil, isn’t it? 
Well, that’s what wc saw' and helped to make — and I think we’re 
damned, every one of us, and maybe we’ll never be torgiven , . . 

“Do you know how it worked, that plan, and what it did to peo- 
ple? Try pouring water into a tank where there’s a pipe at the bottom 
draining it out faster than you pour it, and each bucket you bring 
breaks that pipe an inch wider, and the hardei you work the more 
is demanded of you. and you stand slinging buckets forty hours a 
week, then forty-eight, then fifty-six — for your neighbor’s supper ~ 
for his wife’s operation — for his child’s measles — toi his mother's 

wheel chair — for his uncle’s shirt -for his nephew’s schooling for 

the baby next dooi — for the baby to be born— for anyone anywhere 
around you — it s theirs to receive, from diapers to dentures- -and 
yours to work, from sunup to sundown, month after month, year 
after year, with nothing to show for it but your sweat, with nothing 
in sight for'you but their pleasure, for the whole of your life, without 
rest, without hope without end. . . . From each according to his 
ability, to each according to his need. . . . 

“We're all one big family, they told us, we're all in this together 
But you don’t stand, working an acetylene torch ten hours a day- 
together, and you don’t all get a bellyache— together. What’s whose 
ability and which of whose needs comes first? When it’s all one pot. 
you can’t let any man decide what his own needs are, can you? It 
you did, he might claim that he needs a yacht — and if his feelings is 
ail you have to go by. he might prove it, too. Why not? If it's not 
right for me to own a car until I’ve worked myself into a hospital 
ward, earning a car for every loafer and every naked 'savage on 
earth— why can’t he demand a yacht from me, too, it I still have the 
ability not to have collapsed 7 No? He can’t? Then why |:an he de- 
mand that I go without cream for my coffee until he's jteplastercd 
his living room? ... Oh well . . . Well, anyway, it was decided that 
nobody had the right to judge his own need or ability. Wc voted on 
it. Yes, ma’am, we voted on it in a public meeting twice af year. How 

608 



else could it he done? Do you care to think what would happen at 
sjich a meeting? It took us just one meeting to discover that we had 
become beggars — rotten, whining, sniveling beggars all of us, because 
no man could claim his pay as his rightful earning, he had no rights 
and no earnings, his work didn’t belong to him, it belonged to ‘the 
family,’ and they owed him nothing in return, and the only claim he 
had on them was his need’ — so he had to beg in public for relief 
from his needs, like any lousy moocher, listing all his troubles and 
miseries, down to his patched drawers and his wife’s head colds, 
hoping that ‘the family’ would throw him the alms. He had to claim 
miseries, because it’s miseries, not work, that had become the coin 
of the realm — so it turned into a contest among six thousand panhan- 
dlers, each claiming that his need was worse than his brother's. How 
else could it be done? Do you care to guess what happened, what 
sort of men kept quiet, feeling shame, and what sort got away with 
the jackpot? 

“But that wasn’t all. There was something else that we discovered 
at the same meeting. The factory’s production had fallen by forty 
per cent, in that first half-year, so it was decided that somebody 
hadn't delivered ‘according to his ability.’ Who? How would you tell 
it? The family’ voted on that, too. They voted which men were the 
best, and these men were sentenced to work overtime each night for 
the next six months. Overtime without pay — because you weren’t 
paid by time and you weren't paid by work, only by need. 

“Do 1 have to tell you what happened after that — and into what 
sort of creatures we all started turning, we who had once been 
human? We began to hide whatever ability we had, to slow down 
and watch like hawks that we never worked any faster or better than 
the next fellow. What else could we do, when we knew that if we 
did our best for 'the family/ it’s not thanks or rewards that we'd 
get, but punishment? We knew that for every stinker who'd ruin a 
batch of motors and cost the company money— either through his 
sloppiness, because we didn't have to care, or through plain incompe- 
tence — it’s we who’d have to pay with our nights and our Sundays. 
So we dtd our best to be no gtx>d. 

“ [here was one young boy who started out, full of tire for the 
noble ideal, a bright kid without any schooling, but with a wonderful 
head on his shoulders. The first year, he figured out a work process 
that saved us thousands of man-hours. He gave it to ‘the family,’ 
didn’t ask anything lor it, ei'her. couldn't ask. but that was all right 
with him. It was for the ideal, he said. But when he found himself 
voted as one of our ablest and sentenced to night work, because we 
hadn’t gotten enough from him, he shut his mouth and his brain. 
You can bet he didn’t come up with any ideas, the second year. 

“What was it they'd always told us about the vicious competition 
of the profit system, where men had to compete for who’d do a 
better job than his fellows? Vicious, wasn’t it? Well, they should 
' have seen what it was like when we all had to compete with one 
another for who’d do the worst job possible. There’s no surer way 
to destroy a man than to force him into a spot where he has to aim 
at not doing his best, where he has to struggle to do a bad job, day 

609 



after day. That will finish him quicker than drink or idleness or 
pulling stick-ups for a living. But there was nothing else for us to 
do except to fake unfitness. The one accusation we feared was to be 
suspected of ability. Ability was like a mortgage on you that you 
could never pay off. And what was there to work for? You knew 
that your basic pittance would be given to you anyway, whether you 
worked or not — your ‘housing and feeding allowance,’ it was called — 
and above that pittance, you had no chance to get anything, no 
matter how hard you tried. You couldn’t count on buying a new suit 
of clothes next year — they might give you a ‘clothing allowance’ or 
they might not, according to whether nobody broke a leg, needed 
an operation or gave birth to more babies And if there wasn’t 
enough money for new suits tor everybody, then you couldn’t get 
yOurs, either. 

“There was one man who’d worked hard all his life, because he’d 
always wanted to send his son through college. Well, the boy gradua- 
ted from high school in the second year ot the plan — but ‘the family' 
wouldn’t give the father any ‘allowance’ for the college. I hoy said 
his son couldn’t go to college, until we had enough to send every- 
body’s sons to college — and that we first had to send everybody's 
children through high school, and we didn’t even have enough for 
that. The father died the following year, in a knife fight with some- 
body in a saloon, a fight over nothing in particular — such fights were 
beginning to happen among us all the time. 

“Then there was an old guy, a widower with no family, who had 
one hobby: phonograph records. I guess that was all he ever got out 
of life. In the old days, he used to skip meals just to buy himselt 
some new recording of classical music Well, they didn't give him 
any ‘allowance’ for records — ‘personal luxury,' they called it. But at 
that same meeting, Millie Bush, somebody’s daughter, a mean ugly 
little eighl-year-old, was voted a pair of gold braces for her buck 
teeth — this was ‘medical need.’ because the stall psychologist had 
said that the poor girt would get an inferiority complex if her teeth 
weren’t straightened out. 'The old guy who loved music, turned to 
drink, instead- He got so you never saw him fully conscious anymore. 
But it seems like there was one thing he couldn’t torget. One night, 
he came staggering down the street, saw Millie Bush, swung his fist 
and knocked all her teeth out. Every one of them. 

“Drink, of course, was what we all turned to, some more, some 
less. Don’t ask how we got the money for it. When all the decent 
pleasures are forbidden, there’s always ways to get the rotten ones. 
You don't break into grocery stores after dark and you don’t pick 
your fellow’s pockets to buy classical symphonies or fishing tackle, 
but if it’s to get stinking drunk and forget — you do. Fishing tackle? 
Hunting guns? Snapshot cameras? Hobbies? There vfasn’t any 
‘amusement allowance' for anybody. ‘Amusement’ was th^ first thing 
they dropped. Aren’t you always supposed to be ashamc| to object 
when anybody asks you to give up anything, if it’s something that 
gave you pleasure? Even our ‘tobacco allowance’ was cuf to where 
we got two packs of cigarettes a month — and this, they told us, was 
because the money had to go into the babies’ milk fund. Babies was 

610 



the only item of production that didn’t fall, but rose and kept on 
rising — because people had nothing else to do; I guess, and because 
they didn’t have to care, the baby wasn’t their burden, it was 'the 
family’s.’ In fact, the best chance you had of getting a raise and 
breathing easier for a while was a ‘baby allowance.’ Either that or 
a major disease. 

“It didn't take us long to see how it all worked out. Any man 
who tried to play straight, had to refuse himscit everything. He lost 
h;r> taste for any pleasure, he haled to smoke a nickel's worth of 
tobacco or chew a stick of gum, worrying whether somebody had 
more need for that nickel. He felt ashamed of every mouthful of 
food he swallowed, wondering whose weary night of overtime had 
paid for it, knowing that his food was not his by right, miserably 
wishing to be cheated rather than to cheat, to be a sucker, but not 
a blood-sucker. He wouldn’t marry, he wouldn't help his folks back 
home, he wouldn't put an extra burden on ’the family.’ Besides, if 
he still had some sort of sense of responsibility, iie couldn’t marry 
or bring children into the world, when he could plan nothing, prom- 
ise nothing, count on nothing. But the shiftless and the irresponsible 
had a field day of it. They bred babies, they got girls into trouble, 
they dragged in every worthless relative they had from all over the 
country, every' unmarried pregnant sister, for an extra ‘disability al- 
lowance/ they got more sicknesses than any doctor could disprove, 
they ruined their clothing, their furniture, their homes — what the 
hell, ’the family’ was paying for it! They found more ways of getting 
in need’ than the rest of us could ever imagine — they developed a 
special skill for it, which was the only ability they showed. 

“God help us, ma’am! Do you see what we saw? We saw' that 
we’d been given a law to live by, a moral law. they called it, which 
punished those who observed it— for observing it. The more you 
tried to live up to it, the more you suffered; the more you cheated 
it. the bigger reward you got. Your honesty was like a tool left at 
the mercy of the next man's dishonesty. The honest ones paid, the 
dishonest collected. The honest lost, the dishonest won. How long 
could men stay good under this sort of a law of goodness? We were 
a pretty decent bunch of fellows when we started. There weren't 
many chiselers among us. We knew' our jobs and we were proud of 
it and we worked for the best factory in the country, where old man 
Starnes hired nothing but the pick of the country's labor. Within one 
year under the new plan, there wasn’t an honest man left among us. 
That was the evil, the sort of hell-horror evil that preachers used to 
scare you with, but you never thought to see alive. Not that ihe plan 
encouraged a few bastards, but that it turned decent people into 
hastards, and there was nothing else that it could do— and it was 
called a moral ideal! 

“What was it we were supposed to want to work for? For the 
love of our brothers? What brothers? For the bums, the loafers, the 
moochers we saw all around us? And whether they were cheating 
or plain incompetent, whether they were unwilling or unable — what 
difference did that make to us? If we were tied for life to the level 
of their unfitness, faked or real, how long could we care to go on? 

611 



We had no way of knowing their ability, we had no way of control- 
ling their needs — all we knew was that we were beasts of burden 
struggling blindly in some sort of place that was half-hospital, half- 
Stockyards — a place geared to nothing but disability, disaster, dis- 
ease-— beasts put there for the relief of whatever whoever chose to 
say was whichever's need, 

“Love of our brothers? That’s when we learned to hate our broth- 
ers for the first time in our lives We began to hate them for every 
meat they swallowed, tor every small pleasure they enjoyed, for one 
man’s new shirt, for another’s wife's hat, for an outing with their 
family, for a paint job on their house — it was taken from us, it was 
paid for by our privations, our denials, our hunger. We began to spy 
on one another, each hoping to catch the others lying about their 
needs, so as to cut their ‘allowance’ at the next meeting. We began 
to have stool pigeons who informed on people, who reported that 
somebody had bootlegged a turkey to his family on some Sunday— 
which he’d paid for by gambling, most likely. We began to meddle 
into one another’s lives. We provoked family quarrels, to get some- 
body's relatives thrown out. Any time we saw a man starting to go 
steady with a girl, we made file miserable for him. We broke up 
many engagements. We didn’t want anyone to marry, we didn’t want 
any more dependents to feed. 

“In the old days, we used to celebrate it somebody had a baby, 
we used to chip in and help him out with the hospital bills, if he 
happened to be hard-pressed for the moment. Now, if a baby was 
bom we didn't speak to the parents for weeks. Babies, to us, had 
become what locusts were to farmers. In the old days, we used to 
help a man if he had a bad illness in the family. Now— well, I'll tell 
you about just one case. It was the mother of a man who had been 
with us for fifteen years. She was a kindly old lady, cheerful and 
wise, she knew us all by our first names and we all liked her — we 
used to like her. One day, she slipped on the cellar stairs and lei! 
and brokq her hip. We knew what that meant at her age. The stall 
doctor said that she’d have to be sent to a hospital in town, for 
expensive treatments that would take a long time. The old lady died 
the night before she was to leave for town. They never established 
the cause of death. No. I don't know whether she was murdered. 
Nobody said that. Nobody would talk about it at all. All i know is 
that I — and that's what l can’t forget! — I, too. had caught myself 
wishing that she would die. This — may Ciod forgive us! — was the 
brotherhood, the security, the abundance that the plan was supposed 
to achieve for us! 

“Was there any reason why this sort of horror would ever be 
preached by anybody? Was there anybody who got any profit from 
it? There was. The Starnes heirs. I hope you’re not going to remind 
me that they’d sacrificed a fortune and turned the factory over to us 
as a gift. We were fooled by that one, too. Yes, they gave up the 
factory, But profit, ma’am, depends on what it is you're after. And 
what the Starnes heirs were after, no money on eartty could buy. 
Money is too dean and innocent for that. 

“Eric Starnes, the youngest — he was a jellyfish that didn't have 

612 



the guts to be after anything in particular. He got himself voted as 
Director of our Public Relations Department, which didn't do any- 
thing, except that he had a staff for the not doing of anything, so he 
didn't have to bother sticking around the office. The pay he got— 
well, I shouldn’t call it 'pay/ none of us was 'paid' — the alms voted 
to him was fairly modest, about ten times what I got, but that wasn’t 
riches. Eric didn’t care for money — he wouldn’t have known what 
to do with it. He spent his time hanging around among us, showing 
how chummy he was and democratic. He wanted to be loved, it 
seems. The way he went about it was to keep reminding us that he 
had given us the factory. We couldn’t stand him. 

“Gerald Starnes was our Director of Production. We never learned 
just what the size of his rake-off — his alms — had been. It would have 
taken a staff of accountants to figure that out, and a staff of engineers 
to trace the way it was piped, directly or indirectly into his office. 
None of it was supposed to be for him — it was all tor company 
expenses, Gerald had three cars, four secretaries, five telephones, 
and he used to throw champagne and caviar parties that no tax- 
paving tycoon in the country could have afforded He spent more 
money m one year than his father had earned in profits in the last 
two years of his life. We saw a hundred-pound stack — a hundred 
pounds, we weighed them — of magazines in Gerald's office, full of 
stories about our factory and our noble plan, with big pictures of 
Gerald Staines calling h»m a great social crusader Gerald liked to 
umie into the shops at night, dressed in his formal clothes, flashing 
diamond eutf links the size of a nickel and shaking cigar ashes all 
over. Any cheap show -oft who's got nothing to parade but his cash. 
>\ bad enough * except that he makes no bones about the cash being 
his. and you're free to gape at him or not as you wish, and mostly 
>ou don’t. But when a bastard like Gerald Staines puts on an act 
and keeps spouting that he doesn't care tor material wealth, that 
he's only serving v the family,' that all the lushness is not for himself, 
but tor our sake and foi the common good, because it’s necessary 
to keep up the prestige of the company and of the noble plan in the 
eyes ol the public then that’s when you learn to hate the creature 
as you've never hated anything human. 

“But his sister Ivy was worse She really did not care for material 
wealth. The alms she got was no bigger than ours, and she went 
about in scuffed, flat-heeled shoes and shirtwaists — just to show how 
selfless she was. She was our Director of Distribution. She was the 
lady in charge of our needs. She was the one who held us by the 
throat. Of course, distribution was supposed to be decided by vo- 
ting— by the voice of the people. But when the people are six thou- 
sand howling voices, trying to decide without yardstick, rhyme or 
reason, when there are no rules to the game and each can demand 
anything, but has a right to nothing, when everybody holds power 
over everybody’s life except his own — then it turns out, as it did, 
that the voice of the people is Ivv Starnes. By the end of the second 
year, we dropped the pretense of the ‘family meetings’ — in the name 
of production efficiency and time economy,’ one meeting used to 
take ten days — and all the petitions of need were simply sent to Miss 

613 



Starnes* office. No, not sent. They had to be recited to her in person 
by every petitioner. Then she made up a distribution list, which she 
read to us for our vote of approval at a meeting that lasted three- 
quarters of an hour. We voted approval. There was a ten-minute 
period on the agenda for discussion and objections. We made no 
objections. We knew better by that time. Nobody can divide a facto- 
ry's income among thousands of people, without some sort of a gauge 
to measure people's value. Her gauge was bootlicking. Selfless? In 
her father's time, all of his money wouldn't have given him a chance 
to speak to his lousiest wiper and get away with it, as she spoke to 
our best skilled workers and their wives. She had pale eyes that 
looked fishy, cold and dead. And if you ever want to see pure evil, 
you should have seen the way her eyes glinted when she watched 
some man who'd talked back to her once and who’d just heard his 
name on the list of those getting nothing above basic pittance. And 
when you saw it, you saw the real motive of any person who's ever 
preached the slogan: ‘From each according to his ability, to each 
according to his need.' 

“This was the whole secret of it. At first, I kept wondering how 
it could be possible that the educated, the cultured, the famous men 
of the world could make a mistake of this size and preach, as righ- 
teousness, this sort of abomination — w hen five minutes ot that should 
have told them what would happen if somebody tried to practice 
what they preached. Now I know that they didn’t do it by any kind 
of mistake. Mistakes of this size are never made innocently. If men 
fall for some vicious piece of insanity, when they have no way to 
make it work and no possible reason to explain their choice- -it's 
because they have a reason that they do not wish to tell. And we 
weren't so innocent either, when we voted for the plan at the first 
meeting. We* didn’t do it just because we believed that the drippy 
old guff they spewed was good. We had another reason, but the gufl 
helped us to hide it from our neighbors and from ourselves. The 
guff gave us a chance to pass off as virtue something that we'd Ik* 
ashamed to admit otherwise. T here wasn't a man voting for it who 
didn't think that under a setup ol this kind he’d muscle in on the 
profits of the men abler than himself There wasn’t a man rich and 
smart enough but that he didn't think that somebody was richer and 
smarter, and this plan would give him a share of his better's wealth 
and brain. But while he was thinking that he’d get unearned benefits 
from the men above, he forgot about the men below who'd get 
unearned benefits, too. He forgot about all his interiors who'd rush 
to drain him just as he hoped to drain his superiors The worker 
who liked the idea that his need entitled him to a limousine like his 
boss's, forgot that every bum and beggar on earth would Come howl- 
ing that their need entitled them to an icebox like his owft. That was 
our real motive when we voted — that was the truth oti it— but we 
didn’t like to think it, so the less we liked it, the loude|r we yelled 
about our love for the common good. 

"Well, we got what we asked for. By the time we saw -What it was 
that we'd asked for, it was too late. We were trapped, wfth no place 
to go. The best men among us left the factory in the first week of 

614 



(he plan. We lost our best engineers, superintendents, foremen and 
highest-skilled workers. A man of self-respect doesn’t turn into a 
milch cow for anybody. Some able fellows tried to stick it out, but 
they couldn’t take it for long. We kept losing our men, they kept 
escaping from the factory like from a pest-hole— till we had nothing 
left except the men of need, but none of the men ol ability. 

“And the few of us who were still any good, but stayed on, were 
only those who had been there too long. In the old days, nobody 
ever quit the Twentieth Century — and, somehow, we couldn’t make 
ourselves believe that it was gone, After a while, we couldn’t quit, 
because no other employer would have us — for which 1 can't blame 
him. Nobody would deal with us in any way, no respectable person 
or firm. All the small shops, where we traded, started moving out of 
Starncsville fast — till we had nothing left but saloons, gambling joints 
and crooks who sold us trash at gouging prices. The alms we got 
kept falling, but the cost of our living went up. The list of ihe facto- 
r's needy kept stretching, but the list of its customers shrank. There 
was less and less income to divide among more and more people. 
In the old days, it used to be said that the Twentieth Century Motor 
trademark was as good as the karat mark on gold. I don't know 
what it was that the Starnes heirs thought, if they thought at all. but 
I suppose that like all social planners and like savages, they thought 
that this trademark was a magic stamp which did the trick by some 
sort of voodoo power and that it would keep them rich, as it had 
kept their father. Well, when our customers began to see that we 
never delivered an order on time and never put out a motor that 
didn’t have something wrong with it— the magic stamp began to work 
the other way around: people wouldn’t take a motor as a gift, if it 
was marked twentieth Century. And it came to where our only 
customers were men who never paid and never meant to pay their 
bills, Hut Gerald Starnes, doped by his own publicity, got huffy and 
went around, with an air of moral superiority, demanding that busi- 
nessmen place orders with us. not because our motors were good, 
but because we needed the orders so badly. 

* By that time, a village half-wit could see what generations of 
professors had pretended not to notice. What good would our need 
do to a powei plant when its generators stopped because of our 
defective engines? What good would it do to a man caught on an 
operating table when the electric light went out? What good would 
it do to the passenger of a plane when its motor failed in mid-air? 
And if they bought our product, not because of its merit, but because 
of our need, would that be the good, the right, the moral thing to 
do for the owner of that power plant, the surgeon in that hospital, 
the maker of that plane? 

"Yet this was the moral law that the professors and leaders and 
thinkers had wanted to establish all over the earth. If this is what it 
did in a single small town where wc all knew one another, do you 
tare to think what it would do on a world scale? Do you care to 
imagine what it would be like, if you had to live and to work, when 
you're tied to all the disasters and all the malingering of the globe? 
To work — and whenever any men failed anywhere, it’s you who 

615 



would have to make up for it. To work — with no chance to rise, 
with your meals and your clothes and your home and your pleasure 
depending on any swindle, any famine, any pestilence anywhere on 
earth. To work — with no chance for an extra ration, till the Cambodi- 
ans have been fed and the Patagonians have been sent through col- 
lege. To work — on a blank check held by every creature born, by 
men whom you’!! never see, whose needs you’ll never know, whose 
ability or laziness or sloppiness or fraud you have no way to learn 
and no right of question just to work and work and work-— and leave 
it up to the Ivys and the Geralds of the world to decide whose 
stomach will consume the effort, the dreams and the days of your 
life. And this is the moral law to accept? This — a moral ideal? 

“Well, we tried it— and we learned. Our agony took four years, 
from our first meeting to our last, and it ended the only way it could 
end: in bankruptcy. At our last meeting, Ivy Starnes was the one 
who tried to brazen it out. She made a short, nasty, snippy little 
speech in which she said that the plan had failed because the rest 
of the country had not accepted it, that a single community could 
not succeed in the midst of a selfish, greedy world — and that the 
plan was a noble ideal, but human nature was not good enough for 
it. A young boy — the one who had been punished for giving us a 
useful idea in our first year— got up, as we all sat silent, and walked 
straight to Ivv Staines on the platform. He said nothing. He spat in 
her face. That was the end of the noble plan and of the Twentieth 
Century.” 

The man had spoken as if the burden of his years ol silence had 
slipped suddenly out of his grasp. She knew that this was his tribute 
to her: he had shown no reaction to her kindness, he had seemed 
numbed to human value or human hope, but something within him 
had been reached and his response was this confession, this long, 
desperate cry of rebellion against injustice, held back for years, blit 
breaking out m recognition of the first person he had met in whose 
hearing an appeal for justice would not be hopeless. It was as it the 
life he had been about to renounce were given back to him by the 
two essentials he needed: by his loud and by the presence of a ratio 
nal being. 

“But what about John Galt?*’ she asked. 

Oh . . he said, remembering. ‘Oh, yes . . 

“You were going to tell me why people stalled asking that 
question.” 

“Yes . . .■* He was lt>oking off, as if at some sight which he had 
studied for years, but which remained unchanged and unsolved; his 
face had an odd. questioning look of tenor. 

“You were going to tell me who was the John Gall they mean — 
if there ever was such a person.” ; 

“I hope there wasn't, ma'am. I mean, I hope that it's just a coinci- 
dence, just a sentence that hasn't any meaning.” 

“You had something in mind. What?” ? 

“It was ... it was something that happened at that jhrst meeting 
at the Twentieth Century factory. Maybe that was thp start of it. 
maybe not. I don’t know . , . The meeting was held* on a spring 

616 



night, twelve years ago. The six thousand of us were crowded on 
bleachers built way up to the rafters of the plant’s largest hangar. 
We had just voted for the new plan and we were in an edgy sort of 
mood, making too much noise, cheering the people’s victory, threat- 
ening some kind of unknown enemies and spoiling for a fight, like 
bullies with an uneasy conscience. There were white arclights beating 
down on us and we felt kind of touchy and raw, and we were an 
ugly, dangerous mob in that moment. Gerald Starnes, who was chair- 
man, kept hammering his gavel for order, and we quieted down 
some, but not much, and you could see the whole place moving 
restlessly from side to side, like water in a pan that’s being rocked. 
‘This is a crucial moment in the history of mankind!’ Gerald Starnes 
yelled through the noise. ‘Remember that none of us may now leave 
this place, for each of us belongs to all the others by the moral law 
which we all accept!’ ‘1 don’t/ said one man and stood up. He was 
one of the young engineers. Nobody knew much about him. He’d 
always kept mostly by himself. When he stood up, we suddenly 
turned dead-still. It was the way he held his head, lie was tall and 
slim— and I remember thinking that any two of us could have broken 
his neck without trouble— but what we all felt was fear. He st<x>d 
like a man who knew that he was right. ‘I will put an end to this, 
once and for all/ he said. His voice was dear and without any feeling, 
that was all he said and started to walk out. He walked down the 
length of the place, in the while light, not hurrying and not noticing 
any of us. Nobody moved to slop him. Gerald Starnes cried suddenly 
alter him, ‘How?’ He turned and answered. ‘I will stop the motor 
ol the world? Then he walked out. We never saw him again. We 
never heard what became of him. But years later, when we saw the 
lights going out, one after another, in the great factories that had 
stood solid like mountains for generations, when we saw the gates 
closing and the conveyor belts turning still, when we saw the roads 
growing empty and the stream of cars draining off, when it began 
to look as if some silent power were stopping the generators ol the 
woild and the woild was crumbling quietly. like a body when its 
spirit is gone — (hen wc began to wonder and to ask questions about 
him. We began to ask it of one another, those o{ who had heard 
him say it. We began to thmk that he had kept his word, that he, 
who had seen and known the truth we refused to know, was the 
retribution wc had called upon our heads, the avenger, the man of 
that justice which we had defied. We began to think that he had 
damned us and there was no escape from his verdict and we would 
never be able to get away from him— and this was the more terrible 
because he was not pursuing us, it was we who were suddenly look- 
ing tor him and he had merely gone without a trace. We found no 
answer about him anywhere. Wc wondered by what sort of impossi- 
ble power he could have done what tie had promised to do. There 
was no answer to that. We began to think of him whenever wc saw 
another collapse in the world, which nobody could explain, whenever 
wc took another blow, whenever we lost another hope, whenever 
we felt caught in this dead, gray fog that’s descending all over the 
earth /Perhaps people heard us crying that question and they did not 

617 



know what we meant, but they knew too well the feeling that made 
us cry it. They, too, felt that something had gone from the world. 
Perhaps this was why they began to say it, whenever they felt that 
there was no hope. I’d like to think that 1 am wrong, that those 
words mean nothing, that there’s no conscious intention and no 
avenger behind the ending of the human race. But when l hear them 
repeating that question, 1 feel afraid. I think of the man who said 
that he would stop the motor of the world. You see, his name was 
John Galt.*’ 

* * 

She awakened, because the sound of the wheels had changed. It 
was an irregular beat, with sudden screeches and short, sharp cracks, 
a sound like the broken laughter of hysteria, with the fitful jerking 
of the car to match it. She knew, before she glanced at her watch, 
that this was the track of the Kansas Western and that the train had 
started on its long detour south from Kirby. Nebraska. 

The train was half-empty; few people had ventured across the 
continent on the first Comet since the tunnel disaster. She had given 
a bedroom to the tramp, and then had remained alone with his story. 
She had wanted to think of it, of all the questions she intended to 
ask him tomorrow — but she had found her mind Iro/en and still, 
like a spectator staring at the story, unable to function, only to stare. 
She had felt as if she knew the meaning of that spectacle, knew it 
with no further questions and had to escape it. To move — had been 
the words beating in her mind with peculiar urgency — to move- -as 
if movement had become an end in itself, crucial, absolute and 
doomed. 

Through a thin layer of sleep, the sound of the wheels had kept 
running a race with the growth of her tension. She had kept awaken- 
ing, as in a causeless start of panic, finding herself upright in the 
darkness, thinking blankly: What was it: — then telling herself in reas- 
surance: We’re moving . . . we’re still moving. . . . 

The track of the Kansas Western was worse than she had ex- 
pected — slie thought, listening to the wheels. The train was now car- 
rying her hundreds of miles away from Utah. She had felt a 
desperate desire to get off the train on the main line, abandon all 
the problems of Taggart Transcontinental, find an airplane and fly 
straight to Quentin Daniels. It had taken a cheerless effort of will 
to remain in her car. 

She lay in the darkness, listening to the wheels, thinking that only 
Daniels and his motor still remained like a point of lire ahead, pull- 
ing her forward. Of what use would the motor now be to her? She 
had no answer. Why did she feel so certain of the desperate need 
to hurry? She had no answer. To reach him in time, was the only 
ultimatum left in her mind. She held onto it, asking qo questions. 
Wordlessly, she knew the real answer: the motor was needed, not to 
move trains, but to keep her moving. 

She could not hear the beat of the fourth knocks <$ny longer in 
the jumbled screeching of metal, she could not hear thi steps of the 
enemy she was racing, only the hopeless stampede of $anic. . . . VU 
get there in time, she thought, I’ll get there first. I'll save the motor. 

618 



There’s one motor he's not going to stop, she thought ... he's not 
going to stop . , . he's not going to stop . . . He’s not going to stop, 
she thought — awakening with a jolt, jerking her head off the pillow. 

I he wheels had stopped. 

For a moment, she remained still, trying to grasp the peculiar 
stillness around her. It felt like the impossible attempt to create a 
sensory image of non-existence. There were no attributes of reality 
to perceive, nothing but their absence: no sound, as if she were alone 
on the train— no motion, as if this were not a train, but a room in 
a building — no light, as if this were neither train nor room, but space 
without objects — no sign of violence or physical disaster, as if this 
were the state where disaster is no longer possible. 

In the moment when she grasped the nature of the stillness, her 
body sprang upright with a single curve of motion, immediate and 
violent like a cry of rebellion. The loud screech of the window shade 
went like a knife-cut through the silence, as she threw the shade 
upward. There was nothing outside but anonymous stretches of prai- 
rie; a strong wind was breaking the clouds, and a shaft of moonlight 
tell through, but it fell upon plains that seemed as dead as those 
lrom which it came. 

The sweep of her hand pressed the light switch and the bell to 
summon the porter. 'Hie electric light came on and brought her back 
to a rational world. She glanced at her watch: it was a few minutes 
past midnight. She looked out of the rear window: the track went 
off in a straight line and, at the prescribed distance, she saw the red 
lanterns left on the ground, placed conscientiously to protect the rear 
ot the train. The sight seemed reassuring. 

She pressed the potter's bell once more. She waited. She went to 
the vestibule, unlocked the door and leaned out to look down the 
line ot the train. A few windows were lighted in the long, tapering 
band ol steel, but she saw no figures, no sign of human activity. She 
slammed the door, came back and started to dress, her movements 
suddenly calm and swift. 

No one came to answer her bell. When she hastened across to the 
next car, she fell no fear, no uncertainty, no despair, nothing but the 
urgency of action. 

There was no porter in the cubbyhole of the next cat, no porter 
m the car beyond. She hurried down the narrow passageways, meet- 
ing no one. But a few compartment doors were open. The passengers 
'al inside, dressed or half-dressed, silently as if waiting. They 
watched her rush by with oddly furtive glances, as if they knew what 
she was after, as they had expected someone to come and to face 
what they had not faced. She went on, running down the spinal cord 
of a dead train, noting the peculiar combination of lighted compart- 
ments, open doors and empty passages: no one had ventured to step 
out. No one had wanted to ask the first question. 

She ran through the train’s only coach, where some passengers 
slept in contorted poses of exhaustion, while others, awake and still, 
sat hunched, like animals waiting for a blow, making no move to 
avert i U 

In the vestibule of the coach, she stopped. She saw a man, who 

619 



had unlocked the door and was leaning out, looking inquiringly 
ahead through the darkness, ready to step off. He turned at the 
sound of her approach. She recognized his face: It was Owen Kel- 
logg, the man who had rejected the future she had once offered him. 

“Kellogg!” she gasped, the sound of laughter in her voice like a 
cry of relief at the sudden sight of a man in a desert. 

“Hello, Miss Taggart,” he answered, with an astonished smile that 
held a touch of incredulous pleasure — and of wistfulness. “1 didn’t 
know you were aboard.” 

“Come on,” she ordered, as if he were still an employee of the 
railroad. “I think we’re on a frozen train.” 

“We are,” he said, and followed her with prompt, disciplined 
obedience. 

No explanations were necessary. It was as if. in unspoken under- 
standing. they were answering a call to duty — and it seemed natural 
that of the hundreds aboard, it was the two of them who should be 
pa rlners-in-d anger. 

“Any idea how long we’ve been standing?” she asked, as they 
hurried on through the next car. 

“No,” he said. “We were standing when I woke up.” 

They went the length of the train, finding no porters, no waiters 
in the diner, no brakemen, no conductor. They glanced at each other 
once in a while, but kept silent. They knew the stories of abandoned 
trains, of the crews that vanished in sudden bursts of rebellion 
against serfdom. 

They got off at the end of the train, with no motion around them 
save the wind on their faces, and they climbed swiftly aboard the 
engine The engine's headlight was on, stretching like an accusing 
arm into the void of the night. The engine’s cab was empty 

Her cry of desperate triumph broke out in answer to the shock of 
the sight: “Good for them! They’re human beings!” 

She stopped, aghast, as at the cry ol a stranger. She noticed that 
Kellogg slqpd watching her curiously, with the taint hint of a smile. 

It was an old steam engine, the best that the railroad had been 
able to provide for the Comet, The fire was banked in the grates, 
the steam gauge was low, and in the great windshield before them 
the headlight fell upon a band of ties that should have been running 
to meet them, but lay still instead, like a ladder's steps, counted, 
numbered and ended. 

She reached for the logbook and looked at the names of tile train’s 
last crew. The engineer had been Pat Logan. 

Hei head dropped slowly, and she closed her eyes. She thought 
of the first run on a green-blue track, that must have been in Pat 
Logan’s mind — as it was now in hers— -through the silent hours of 
his last run on any rail. 

“Miss Taggart?” said Owen Kellogg softly. „ 

She jerked her head up. “Yes,” she said, “yes . . . Well”— her 
voice had no color except the metallic tinge of decision— we’ll have 
to get to a phone and call for another crew.” She glaiiced at her 
watch. “At the rate we were running, 1 think we must be febout eight 
miles from the Oklahoma state line. I believe Bradshaw is this road’s 

620 



nearest division point to call* We’re somewhere within thirty miles 
of it.” 

“Are there any Taggart trains following us?” 

“ The next one is Number 253, the transcontinental freight, but it 
won’t get here till about seven am., if it’s running on lime, which 
1 doubt.” 

“Only one freight in seven hours?” He said it involuntarily, with 
a note of outraged loyally to the great railroad he had once been 
proud to serve. 

Her mouth moved in the brief snap of a smile. “Our transcontinen- 
tal traffic is not what it was in your day.” 

He nodded slowly. “1 don’t suppose there are any Kansas Western 
trains coming tonight, either?” 

“I can’t remember offhand, but 1 think not.” 

He glanced at the poles by the side of the track. “I hope that the 
Kansas Western people have kept their phones in order.” 

“You mean that the chances are they haven’t, if we judge by the 
state of their track. But we'll have to try it.” 

“Yes ” 

She turned to go, but stopped She knew' it was useless to com- 
ment, but the w'ords came involuntarily. “You know,” she said, “it's 
those lanterns our men pul behind the train to protect us that’s the 
haidest thing to take. They . . . they felt more concern for human 
lives than their country had shown for theirs ” 

His swift glance at her was like a shot of deliberate emphasis, then 
he answered gravely. “Yes. Miss Taggart ” 

Climbing down the ladder on the side ol the engine, they saw a 
clustei oi passengers gathered by the track and more figures emerg- 
ing from the train to join them By some special instinct of their 
own, the men who had sat waiting knew that someone had taken 
charge, someone had assumed the responsibility and it was now safe 
to show signs of life. 

They all looked at her with an air of inquiring expectation, as she 
apptoachcd. The unnatural pallor of the moonlight seemed to dis- 
solve the differences of their faces and to stress the quality they all 
had in common: a look of cautious appraisal, part fear, part plea, 
part impertinence held in abeyance. 

“Is there anyone here who wishes to be spokesman for the passen- 
gers?” she asked. 

They looked at one another. There was no answer. 

“Very well,” she said. “You don’t have to speak. I’m Dagny Tag- 
gart, the Operating Vice-President of this railroad, and” — there was 
a rustle of response from the group, half-movement, half-whisper, 
resembling relief — “and I’ll do the speaking. We are on a train that 
has been abandoned by its crew. There was no physical accident. 
The engine is intact. But there is no one to run it. litis is what the 
newspapers call a frozen train. You all know what it means — and 
you know the reasons. Perhaps you knew the reasons long before 
they \fcere discovered by the men who deserted you tonight. The law 
forbade them to desert. But this will not help you now.” 

621 



A woman shrieked suddenly, with the demanding petulance of 
hysteria. "What are we going to do?" 

Dagny paused to look at her* The woman was pushing forward, 
to squeeze herself into the group, to place some human bodies be- 
tween herself and the sight of the great vacuum — the plain stretching 
off and dissolving into moonlight, the dead phosphorescence of im- 
potent, borrowed energy The woman had a coat thrown over a 
nightgown: the coat was slipping open and her stomach protruded 
under the gown’s thin cloth, with that loose obscenity of manner 
which assumes all human self-revelation to be ugliness and makes 
no effort to conceal it, For a moment, Dagnv regretted the necessity 
to continue. 

“I shall go down the track to a telephone," she continued, her 
voice dear and as cold as the moonlight "There are emergency 
telephones at intervals of live miles along the right-of-way, l shall 
call for another crew to be sent here. This will take some time. You 
will please stay aboard and maintain such order as you are capable 
of maintaining." 

"What about the gangs of raiders?" asked another woman’s ner- 
vous voice. 

"1hats true," said Dagny. i'd better have someone to accompany 
me. Who wishes to go?" 

She had misunderstood the woman’s motive. There was no answer. 
There were no glances directed at her or at one another. There were 
no eyes — only moist ovals glistening in the moonlight. There they 
were, she thought, the men of the new age. the demanders and recipi- 
ents of self-sacrifice. She was struck by a quality of anger in their 
silence -an anger saying that she was supposed to spare them mo- 
ments such as this — and, with a feeling of cruelty new to her, she 
remained silent by conscious intention. 

She noticed that Owen Kellogg, too, was waiting; hut he was not 
watching the passengers, he was watching her face. When he became 
certain that there would be no answer from the crowd, he said qui- 
etly, "I’ll go with you, of course, Miss Taggart." 

"Thank you." 

"What about us?" snapped the nervous woman, 

Dagny turned to her, answering in the formal, inflect tonless mono- 
tone of a business executive, "There have been no cases of raider 
gang attacks upon frozen trains — unfortunately.” 

"Just where are we?" asked a bulky man with too expensive an 
overcoat and too flabby a face; his voice had a lone intended for 
servants by a man unfit to employ them. "In what part of what 
state?" 

"I don’t know," she answered. 

"How long will we be kept here?" asjted another, in the tone of 
a creditor who is imposed upon by a dt&tor. 

"I don’t know." 

"When will we get to San Francisco?” asked a third, in the manner 
of a sheriff addressing a suspect. 

"1 don’t know." 

The demanding resentment was breaking loose, in small, crackling 

622 



puffs, like chestnuts popping open in the dark oven of the minds 
who now felt certain that they were taken care of and safe. 

“This is perfectly outrageous!” yelled a woman, springing forward, 
throwing her words at Dagny’s face. “You have no right to let this 
happen! I don't intend to be kept waiting m the middle of nowhere! 

1 expect transportation!” 

“Keep your mouth shut." said Dagny, “or I’ll lock the train doors 
and leave you wheie you are.” 

“You can’t do that! You're a common carrier! You have no right 
to discriminate against me* I’ll report it to the Unification Board!” 

“—it I give you a train to get you within sight or hearing of your 
Board.” said Dagny, turning away. 

She saw Kellogg looking at hex, his glance like a line drawn under 
her words, underscoring them for her own attention. 

“Gel a flashlight somewhere.” she said, “while 1 go to get rny 
handbag, then we'll start.” 

When they started out on their way to the track phone, walking 
past the silent line of cars, they saw another figure descending from 
the train and hurrying to meet them. She recognized the tramp. 

"Trouble, ma'am?” he asked, stopping. 

“ I he crew has deserted.” 

“Oh. What’s to be done 7 ” 

“I’m going to a phone to call the division point.” 

“You can't go alone, ma’am. Not these days I'd better go with 
you. 

She smiled, “ thanks. But I’ll be ail right. Mr. Kellogg here is going 
with me. Say — what’s your name 7 ” 

“Jeff Allen, ma’am.” 

“I isten, Allen, have >ou evei worked for a railroad?” 

“No, ma’am.” 

“Well, you’re working foi one now. You're deputy-conductor and 
proxy-vice-president in charge of operation. Your job is to take 
charge ol this train in my absence, to preserve order and to keep 
the cattle from stampeding. Tell them that I appointed you. You 
don't need any proof. They’ll obey anybody who expects obedience.” 

“Yes, ma’am,” he answered firmly, with a look of understanding. 

She remembered that money inside a man's pocket had the power 
to turn into confidence inside his mind; she took a hundred-doilar 
bill (rom her bag and slipped it into his hand. “As advance on 
wages,” she said. 

“Yes. ma’am.” 

She had started off, when he called after her, “Miss Taggart!” 

She turned. “Yes?” 

“Thank you,” he said. 

She smiled, half-raising her hand in a parting salute, and walked 
on. 

“Who is that?” asked Kellogg. 

“A tramp who was caught stealing a ride.” 

“Hc*ll do the job, l think.” 

“He will.” 

They walked silently past the engine and on in the direction of its 

623 



headlight. At first, stepping from tie to tie, with the. violent light 
beating against them from behind, they still felt as if they were at 
home in the normal realm of a railroad. Then she found herself 
watching the fight on the ties under her feet, watching it ebb slowly, 
trying to hold it, to keep seeing its fading glow, until she knew that 
the hint of a glow on the wood was no longer anything but moon- 
light. She could not prevent the shudder that made her turn to look 
back. The headlight still hung behind them, like the liquid silvei 
globe of a planet, deceptively close, but belonging to another orbit 
and another system. 

Owen Kellogg walked silently beside her, and she felt certain that 
they knew each other’s thoughts. 

“He couldn’t have. Oh God, he couldn't!” she said suddenly, not 
realizing that she had switched to words. 

“Who?” 

“Nathaniel Taggart. He couldn’t have worked with people like 
those passengers. He couldn’t have run trains for them. He couldn’t 
have employed them He couldn’t have used them at all, neither as 
customers nor as workers.” 

Kellogg smiled. “You mean that he couldn’t have grown rich by 
exploiting them. Miss Taggart?” 

She nodded. “They . . she said, and he heard the faint trembling 
of her voice, which was love and pain and indignation, “they’ve said 
for years that he rose by thwarting the ability of others, by leaving 
them no chance, and that . . . that human incompetence was to his 
selfish interest. . . . Bui he . . it wasn’t obedience that he required 
of people.” 

“Miss Taggart,” he said, with an odd note of sternness in his voice, 
“just remember that he represented a axle ol existence which -lor 
a brief span in all human history — drove slavery out of the civilized 
world. Remember it, when you feel baffled by the nature of his 
enemies.” 

“Have you ever heard of a woman named Ivy Starnes?” 

“Oh yes.” 

“I keep thinking that this was what she would have enjoyed — the 
spectacle of those passengers topight. This was what she’s after. But 
we — we can’t five with it, you and I, can we? No one can live with 
it. It’s not possible to live with it.” 

“What makes you think that Ivy Starnes's purpose is fife?” 

Somewhere on the edge of her mind —like the wisps she saw float- 
ing on the edges of the prairie, neither quite rays nor fog nor cloud — 
she felt some shape which she could not grasp, half -suggested and 
demanding to be grasped. 

She did not speak, and— like the linksjof a chain unrolling through 
their silence — the rhythm of their steps! went on, spaced to the ties, 
scored by the dry, swift beat of heels oh wood. 

She had not had time to be awate of feim, except as of a providen- 
tial comrade-in-competence: now she glanced at him with conscious 
attention. His face had the clear, hard look she remembered having 
liked in the past. But the face had growh calmer, as if more serenely 
at peace. His clothes were threadbare, tfe wore an old leather jacket, 

624 



and even in the darkness she could distinguish the scuffed blotches 
streaking across the leather. 

“What have you been doing since you left Taggart Transcontinen- 
tal?” she asked. 

“Oh, many things.” 

“Where are you working now?” 

“On special assignments, more or less.” 

“Of what kind?” 

“Of every kind.” 

“YouTe not working for a railroad?” 

“No.” 

The sharp brevity of the sound seemed to expand it into an elo- 
quent statement. She knew that he knew her motive. “Kellogg, if I 
told you that I don’t have a single first-rate man left on the Taggart 
system, if I offered you any job, any terms, any money you cared to 
name— would you come back to us?” 

“No.” 

“You were shocked by our loss of traffic. 1 don’t think you have 
any idea of what our loss of men has done to us. 1 can’t tell you the 
sort of agony 1 went through three days ago, trying to find somebody 
able to build five miles ol temporary track. 1 have fifty miles to build 
through the Rockies. I see no way to do it. But il has to be done. 
I’ve combed the country for men. There aren’t any. And then to run 
into you suddenly, to find you here, in a day coach, when I'd give 
halt the system for one employee like you — do you understand why 
I can’t let you go? Choose anything you wish. Want to be general 
manager of a region? Or assistant operating v ice-pi esidont? ’ 

“No.” 

“You’re still working for a living, aren’t vou?” 

“Yes.” 

“You don’t seem to be making very much ” 

“I’m making enough for my needs -and for nobody else’s.” 

"Why are you willing to work for anyone but Taggart Trans- 
continental?” 

"Because you wouldn't gne me the kind of job I’d want.” 

"P” She stopped still. “Good God. Kellogg! — haven’t you under- 
stood? I’d give you any job you name!” 

“All right. Track walker ” 

"Whai?" 

' Section hand, fcngine wiper.” He smiled at the look on her face. 
"No? You see. I smu you woutdn't.” 

“Do you mean that you'd take a day laborer’s job?” 

"Any time you offered it.” 

“But nothing better?” 

"lhat’s right, nothing better.” 

"Don’t you understand that I have loo many men who* re able to 
do those jobs, but nothing better?” 

“I understand it. Miss Taggart, Do you?” 

“What I need is your — ” 

“ — mind. Miss Taggart? My mind is not on the market any 
longer.” 


625 



She stood looking at him, her face growing harder. “You’re one 
of them, aren’t you?” she said at last. 

“Of whom?” 

She did not answer, shrugged and went on. 

“Miss Taggart,” he asked, “how long will you remain willing to 
be a common carrier ?” 

“I won’t surrender the world to the creature you’re quoting.” 

“The answer you gave her was much more icalistic,” 

The chain of their steps had stretched through many silent minutes 
before she asked. “Why did you stand by me tonight? Why were 
you willing to help me?” 

He answered easily, almost gaily, “Because there isn't a passenger 
on that train who needs to get where he’s going more urgently than 
1 do. If the tram can be started, none will profit more than I. But 
when l need something, I don’t sit and expect transportation, like 
that creature of yours.” 

“You don't? And what if all trains stopped running?” 

“ITien l wouldn't count on making a crucial journey by train.” 

“Where are you going?” 

“West.” 

“On a ‘special assignment”*” 

“No. For a month's vacation with some friends.” 

“A vacation? And it’s that important to you?” 

“More important than anything on earth ” 

They had walked two miles when they came to the small gray box 
on a post by the traekside, which was the emergency telephone. The 
box hung sidewise, beaten by storms. She jerked it open. The tele- 
phone was there, a familiar, reassuring object, glinting m the beam 
of Kellogg’s flashlight. But she knew, the moment she pressed the 
receiver to her ear, and he knew, when he saw her linger tapping 
sharply against the hook, that the telephone was dead. 

She handed the receiver to him without a word. She held the 
flashlight, while he went swiftly over the instrument, then tore it off 
the wall and studied the wires. 

“The wire’s okay,” he said. “The current’s on. It’s this particular 
instrument that’s out of order. There’s a chance that the next one might 
be working.” He added, “The next one is five miles away.” 

“Let’s go,” she said. 

Far behind them, the engine’s headlight was still visible, not a 
planet any longer, but a small star winking through mists of distance 
Ahead of them, the rail went off into bluish space, with nothing to 
mark its end. 

She realized how often she had glanced back at that headlight; so 
long as it remained in sight, she had felt as if a life-line were holding 
them anchored safely; now they had to break it and dive into . . 
and dive off this planet, she thought. noticed that Kellogg, too, 
stood looking back at the headlight. j 

They glanced at each other, but sa|d nothing. The crunch of a 
pebble under her shoe sole burst like' a firecracker in the silence. 
With a coldly intentional movement, he kicked the telephone instru- 

626 



ment and sent it rolling into a ditch: the violence of the noise shat- 
tered the vacuum. 

“God damn him/’ he said evenly, not raising his voice, with a 
loathing past any display of emotion. “He probably didn’t feel like 
attending to his job, and since he needed his pay check, nobody had 
the right to ask that he keep the phones vn order.” 

“Come on/’ she said. 

“We can rest, if you feel tired. Miss Taggart.” 

“I’m all right. We have no time to feel tired.” 

“That’S our great error. Miss T aggart. We ought to take the time, 
some day.” 

She gave a brief chuckle, she stepped onto a tie of the track, 
stressing the step as her answer, and they went on. 

It was hard, walking on ties, but when they tried to walk along 
the trackside, they found that it was harder. ITie soil, half-sand, half- 
dust, sank under their heels, like the soft, unresisting spread of some 
substance that was neither liquid nor solid. They went back to walk- 
ing from tie to tic; it was almost like stepping from log to log in the 
midst of a river. 

She thought of what an enormous distance five miles had suddenly 
become, and that a division point thirty miles away was now unat- 
tainable — after an eia of railroads built by men who thought in thou- 
sands of transcontinental miles. That net of rails and lights, spreading 
trom ocean to ocean, hung on the snap of a wire, on a broken 
connection inside a rusty phone — no, she thought, on something 
much more powcrtul and much more delicate. It hung on the connec- 
tions in the minds of the men who knew that the existence of a wire, 
of a train, ol a job, of themselves and their actions was an absolute 
not to be escaped. When such minds were gone, a two-thousand-ton 
train was left at the mercy of the muscles of her legs. 

Fired? —she thought; even the strain of walking was a value, a 
small piece of reality in the stillness around them. The sensation of 
effort was a specific experience, it was pain and could be nothing 
else -in the midst of a space which was neither light nor dark, a soil 
which neither gave nor resisted, a fog which neither moved nor hung 
still. Their strain was the only evidence of their motion: nothing 
changed m the emptiness around them, nothing took form to mark 
their progress. She had always wondered, in incredulous contempt, 
about the sects that preached the annihilation of the universe as the 
ideal to be attainted. There , she thought, was their world and the 
content of their minds made real. 

When the green light of a signal appeared by the track, it gave 
them a point to reach and pass, but — incongruous in the midst of 
the floating dissolution — it brought them no sense of relief, it seemed 
to come from a long since extinguished world, like those stars whose 
light remains after they are gone. The green circle glowed in space, 
announcing a clear track, inviting motion where there was nothing 
to move. Who was that philosopher, she thought, who preached that 
motion exists without any moving entities? This was his world, too. 

She found herself pushing forward with increasing effort, as if 
against some resistance that was, not pressure, but suction. Glancing 

627 



at Kellogg, she saw that he, too, was walking like a .man braced 
against a storm. She felt as if the two of them were the sole 
survivors ... of reality, she thought — two lonely figures fighting, not 
through a storm, but worse: through non-existence. 

If was Kellogg who glanced back, after a while, and she followed 
his glance: there was no headlight behind them. 

TTiey did not stop. Looking straight ahead, he reached absently 
into his pocket; she fell certain that the movement was involuntary; 
he produced a package of cigarettes and extended it to her. 

She was about to take a cigarette — then, suddenly, she seized his 
wrist and tore the package out of his hand. It was a plain white 
package that bore, as single imprint, the sign of the dollar. 

“Give me the. flashlight!" she ordered, stopping. 

He stopped obediently and sent the beam of the flashlight at the 
package in her hands. She caught a glimpse of his face: he looked a 
little astonished and very amused. 

There was no printing on the package, no trade name, no address, 
only the dollar sign stamped in gold. The cigarettes bore the same 
sign. 

“Where did you get this?” she asked. 

He was smiling. “If you know enough to ask that. Miss Taggart, 
you should know that I won’t answer.” 

“I know that this stands for something.” 

“The dollar sign? For a great deal. It stands on the vest of every 
fat, piglike figure in ever> cartoon, for the purpose of denoting a 
crook, a grafter, a scoundrel - as the one sure-fire brand of evil. It 
stands — as the money of a free country — for achievement, for suc- 
cess, for ability, for man s creative power —and. precisely for these 
reasons, it is used as a brand of infamy. It stands stamped on the 
forehead of a man like Hank Rearden, as a mark of damnation 
Incidentally, do you know where that sign comes from? It stands for 
the initials of the United States.” 

He snapped the flashlight off, but he did not move to go; she could 
distinguish I he hint of his bitter smile. 

“Do you know that the United States is the only country in history 
that has e\er used its own monogram as a symbol of depravity? Ask 
yourself why. Ask yourself how long a country that did that could 
hope to exist, and whose moral standards have destroyed it It was 
the only country m history where wealth was not acquired by looting, 
but by production, not by force, but by trade, the only country whose 
money was the symbol of man’s right to his own nnnd, to his work, 
to his life, to his happiness, to himself. If this is evil, by the present 
standards of the world, if this is the reason for damning us, then 
we— we, the dollar chasers and makers-r-accepl it and choose to be 
damned by that world. We choose to wjear the sign ol the dollar on 
our foreheads, proudly, as our badge of nobility— the badge wc are 
willing to live for and. if need be, to dife.” 

He extended his hand for the packagd. She held it as if her lingers 
would not let it go, but gave up and placed it on his palm. With 
deliberate slowness, as if to underscore the meaning of his gesture, 
he offered her a cigarette. She took if and placed it between her 

628 



lips. He took one for himself, struck a match, lighted both and they 
walked on. 

They walked, over rotting logs that sank without resistance into 
the shifting ground, through a vast, uncongealed globe of moonlight 
and coiling mist — with two spots of living fire in their hands and the 
glow ol two small circles to light their faces. 

“Fire, a dangerous force, tamed at his fingertips . she remem- 
bered the old man saying to her, the old man who had said that 
these cigarettes were not made anywhere on earth. “When a man 
thinks, there is a spot of fire alive in his mind— and it’s proper that he 
should have the burning point of a cigarette as his one expression.’’ 

“1 wish you’d tell me who makes them,” she said, in the tone of 
a hopeless plea. 

He chuckled good-naturedly. “I can tell you this much: they’re 
made by a friend of mine, for sale, but — not being a common ear- 
lier — he sells them only to his friends."' 

“Sell me that package, will you?” 

“I don't think you’ll be able to afford it, Miss Taggart, but— all 
right, if you wish.” 

“How much is it?” 

“Five cents.” 

“Five cents?” che repeated, bewildered. 

“Five cents --” he said, and added, “in gold.” 

She stopped, staring at him. “In gold?” 

“Yes, Miss Taggart.” 

“Well, what's your rale of exchange 9 How much is it in our nor- 
mal money?” 

“There is no rate of exchange. Miss Taggart. No amount of physi- 
cal — or spiritual-— currency, whose sole standard of value is the de- 
cree of Mr. Wesley Mouch, will buy these cigarettes.” 

“I see.” 

He reached into his pocket, took out the package and handed it 
to her. “I’ll give them to you. Miss Taggart.” he said, “because 
you’ve earned them many times over- -and because you need them 
foi the same purpose we do.” 

“What purpose?” 

“To remind us — in moments of discouragement, in the loneliness 
ol exile — of our true homeland, which has always been yours, too, 
Miss Taggart.” 

“Thank you,” she said. She put the cigarettes in her pocket; he 
saw that her hand was trembling. 

When they reached the fourth of the five mileposts, they had been 
silent for a long time, with no strength left for anything but the effort 
of moving their feet. Far ahead, they saw a dot of light, too low on 
the horizon and too harshly clear to be a star. They kept watching 
it, as they walked, and said nothing until they became certain that 
it was a powerful electric beacon blazing in the midst of the empty 
prairie. 

“What is that?” she asked. 

“I don’t know,” he said. “It looks like — ” 

“No,” she broke in hastily, “it couldn’t be. Not around here.” 

629 



She did not want to hear him name the hope which "she had felt 
for many minutes past. She could not permit herself to think of it 
or to know that the thought was hope. 

They found the telephone box at the fifth milepost. The beacon 
hung like a violent spot of cold tire, less than half a mile farther 
south. 

The telephone was working. She heard the buzz of the wire, like 
the breath of a living creature, when she lifted the receiver. Then a 
drawling voice answered. “Jessup, at Bradshaw.” The voice sounded 
sleepy. 

"This is Dagnv Taggart, speaking from- " 

“Who?’* 

“Dagny Taggart, of Taggart Transcontinental, speaking™" 

-Oh. . . Oh yes ... I see . . Yes?” 

“ — speaking from your track phone Number 83. The Comet is 
stalled seven miles north of here It's been abandoned. The crew 
has deserted.” 

There was a pause. “Well, what do you want me to do about it 9 " 

She had to pause m turn, in order to believe it. “Are you the 
night dispatcher 9 ” 

”Yeah.” 

“Then send another crew out to us at once ” 

“A full passenger train crew?” 

“Of course.” 

“Now?” 

“Yes.” 

There was a pause. "The iules don't say anything about that.” 

“Get me the chief dispatcher,” she said, choking. 

“He's away on his vacation.” 

“Get the division superintendent.” 

“He’s gone down to Laurel for a couple of days." 

“Get me somebody who’s in charge ” 

“I’m in charge.” 

“Listen,'’ she said slowly, fighting for patience, “do you understand 
that there’s a train, a passenger limited, abandoned in the middle of 
the prairie?” 

“Yeah, but how am l to know what Lm supposed to do about it? 
The rules don’t provide for it. Now if you had an accident, we’d 
send out the wrecker, but if there was no accident . . . you don't 
need the wrecker, do you?” 

“No. We don't need the wrecker. We need men. Do you under- 
stand? Living men to run an engine.” * 

“The rules don’t say anything about a train without men. Or about 
men without a train. There's no rule ft>r calling out a full crew in 
the middle of the night and sending th^m to hunt for a train some- 
where. I’ve never heard of it before.” 

“You’re hearing it now. Don't you kjaow what you have to do?” 

“Who am l to know?” 

“Do you know that your job is to keep trains moving?” 

“My job is to obey the rules. If I semi out a crew when I’m not 
supposed to, God only knows what’s going to happen! What with 

630 



the Unification Board and all the regulations they've got nowadays, 
who am I to take it upon myself/'* 

“And what’s going to happen if you leave a train stalled on the 
line?” 

“That's not my fault I had nothing to do with it. They can’t blame 
me 1 couldn’t help it.” 

“You're to help it now.” 

“Nobody told me to." 

“/ m telling you to!” 

“How do 1 know' whether you’re supposed to tell me or not? 
We’re not supposed to furnish any Taggart crews. You people were 
to run with your own crews. That's what we were told.” 

“But this is an emergency!” 

“Nobody told me anything about an emergency.” 

She had to take a few seconds to control herself. She saw Kellogg 
watching her with a bitter smile of amusement. 

“Listen,” she said into the phone, “do you know' that the Comet 
was due at Bradshaw over three hours ago?” 

“Oh, sure. But nobody's going to make any trouble about that. 
No tram’s ever on schedule these days.” 

‘‘Then do you intend to leave us blocking your track forever**” 

“We’ve got nothing due till Number 4. the northbound passenger 
out of Laurel, at eight thirty-seven am You can wait till then. The 
day-trick dispatcher will be on then. You can speak to him.” 

“You blasted idiot! This is the Comet'" 

“What's that to me? This isn't Taggart Transcontinental. You peo- 
ple expect a lot for vour money. You’ve been nothing but a headache 
to us, with all the extra work at no extra pay for the little fellows.” 
His voice was slipping into whining insolence. “You can’t talk to me 
that way. The time’s past when you could talk to people that way.” 

She had never believed that there were rnen with whom a certain 
method, which she had never used, would work; such men were not 
hired by Taggart Transcontinental and she had never been forced to 
deal with them before. 

“Do you know who l am?” she asked, in the cold, oveibearing 
tone ol a personal threat. 

It worked. “I ... I guess so,” he answered. 

“Then let me tell you that it you don’t send a crew to me at once, 
you'll be oik of a job within one hour alter I reach Bradshaw, which 
1 11 reach sooner or later. You’d better make it sooner.” 

“Yes, ma’am.” he said. 

“Call out a full passenger train crew and give them orders to run 
us to Laurel, where we have oui own men.” 

“Yes, ma’am.” He added, “Will you tell headquarters that it was 
you who told me to do it?” 

“I will.” 

“And that it’s you who’re responsible for it?” 

“I am.” 

There was a pause, then he asked helplessly. “Now how am I 
going to call the men? Most of them haven’t got any phones,” 

“Do you have a call boy?” 


631 



“Yes, but he won't get here till morning/' 

“Is there anybody in the yards right now?’' 

“There's the wiper in the roundhouse/’ 

“Send him out to call the men/’ 

“Yes, ma’am. Hold the tine.” 

She leaned against the side of the phone box. to wait. Kellogg 
was smiling. 

“And you propose to run a railroad — a transcontinental railroad — 
with thaiT' he asked. 

She shrugged. 

She could not keep her eyes off the beacon. It seemed so close, so 
easily within her reach. She felt as if the unconfessed thought were 
struggling furiously against her. splattering bits of the struggle all over 
her mind: A man able to harness an untapped source of energy, a 
man working on a motor to make all other motors useless . , . she 
could be talking to him, to his kind of brain, in a few hours ... in 
just a few hours. . . . What if there was no need to hurry to him? It 
was what she wanted to do. It was all she wanted. . . . Her work? 
What was her work: to move on to the fullest, most exacting use ot 
her mind — or to spend the rest of her life doing his thinking for a 
man unfit to be a night dispatcher 7 Why had she chosen to work 7 
Was it in order to remain where she had started— night operator of 
Rockdale Station — no, lower than that— she had been better than that 
dispatcher, even at Rockdale — was this to be the final sum: an end 
lower than her beginning ’ . . . There was no reason to hurry? She 
was the reason . . . They needed the trams, but they did not need the 
motor? She needed the motor. . . . Her duty? To whom 7 

The dispatcher was gone for a long time: when he came back, ins 
voice sounded sulky: “Well, the wiper says he can get the men all 
right, but it's no use. because how am 1 going to send them out to 
you? We have no engine.” 

“No engine?” 

“No. The superintendent took one to run down to Laurel, and the 
other’s in the shops, been there for weeks, and the switch engine 
jumped a rail this morning, they’ll be working on her till tomorrow 
afternoon.” 

“What about the wrecker’s engine that you were offering to send 
us?” 

“Oh, she’s up north. They had a wreck there yesterday. She hasn’t 
come back yet/’ 

“Have you a Diesel car?” 

“Never had any such thing. Not around here.” 

“Have you a track motor air?” 

“Yes. We have that/* f 

“Send them out on the track motor a|r.” 

“Oh , . . Yes, ma’am.” 

“Tell your men to stop here, at track? phone Number 83. to pick 
up Mr. Kellogg and myself.” she was locking at the beacon. 

“Yes, ma’am.” 

“Call the Taggart trainmaster at Laurel, report the Comet’s delay 
and explain to him what happened,” She put her hand into her pocket 

632 



and suddenly clutched her fingers: she felt the package of cigarettes. 
“Say — ” she asked, “what's that beacon, about half a mile from here?** 

“From where you are? Oh, that must be the emergency landing 
field of the Flagship Airlines,” 

“I see . . . Well, that’s all. Get your men started at once. Tell them 
to pick up Mr. Kellogg by track phone Number 83.” 

“Yes, ma’am.” 

She hung up. Kellogg was grinning. 

“An airfield, isn’t it?” he asked. 

“Yes ” She stood looking at the beacon, her hand still clutching the 
cigarettes in her pocket. 

“So they’re going to pick up Mr. Kellogg, arc they?” 

She whirled to him. realizing what decision her mind had been 
reaching without her conscious knowledge. “No,” she said, “no, I 
didn’t mean to abandon you here. It’s only that 1, too, have a crucial 
purpose out West, where 1 ought to hurry, so 1 was thinking of trying 
to catch a plane, but 1 can’t do it and it’s not necessary.” 

“Come on,” he said, starting in the direction of the airfield. 

“But I — ” 

“If there’s anything you want to do more urgently than to nurse 
those morons — go right ahead.” 

“More urgently than anything in the world,” she whispered. 

“I'll undertake to remain in charge lor you and to deliver the Comet 
to your man at Laurel.” 

“T hank you . . But if you’re hoping ... I'm not deserting, you 

know.” 

“I know.” 

“Then why are you so eager to help me?” 

“I just want you to see what it’s like to do something you want, 
for once.” 

“There's not much chance that they'll have a plane at that field.” 

“ There’s a good chance that they will.” 

There were two planes on the edge of the airfield: one. the half- 
charred remnant of a wreck, not worth salvaging for scrap-the other, 
a Dwight Sanders monoplane, brand-new, the kind of ship that men 
were pleading for. in vain, all over the country. 

There was one sleepy attendant at the airfield, young, pudgy, and. 
but for a faint smell of college about his vocabulary, a brain-brother 
of the night dispatcher of Bradshaw. He knew nothing about the two 
planes: they had been there when he first took this job a year ago. 
He had never inquired about them and neither had anybody else. In 
whatever silent crumbling had gone on at the distant headquarters, in 
the slow dissolution of a great airline company, the Sanders mono- 
plane had been forgotten — as assets of this nature were being forgot- 
ten everywhere ... as the model of the motor had been forgotten on 
a junk pile and, left in plain sight, had conveyed nothing to the inheri- 
tors and the takers-over. . . . 

There were no rules to tell the young attendant whether he was 
expected to keep the Sanders plane or not. The decision was made 
for him by the brusque, confident manner of the two strangers — by 
the credentials of Miss Dagny Taggart, Vice-President of a railroad — 

633 



by brief hints about a secret, emergency mission, which bounded tike 
Washington to him — by the mention of an agreement with the airline's 
top officials in New York, whose names he had never heard before — 
by a check for fifteen thousand dollars, written by Miss Taggart, as 
deposit against the return of the Sanders plane — and by another 
check, for two hundred bucks, for his own, personal courtesy. 

He fueled the plane, he checked it as best he could, he found a 
map of the country's airports — and she saw that a landing field on 
the outskirts of Alton. Utah, was marked as still in existence. She had 
been too tensely, swiftly active to fed anything, but at the last mo- 
ment, when the attendant switched on the floodlights, when she was 
about to climb aboard, she paused to glance at the emptiness of the 
sky, then at Owen Kellogg. He stood, alone in the white glare, his 
feet planted firmly apart, on an island of cement in a ring of blinding 
lights, with nothing beyond the ring but an irredeemable night -and 
she wondered which one of them was taking the greater chance and 
facing the more desolate emptiness. 

“In case anything happens to me,” she said, “will yon tell Eddie 
Willers in my office to give Jeff Allen a job, as I promised?’ 1 

“1 will . . Is this all you wish to be done ... in case anything 

happens?” 

She considered it and smiled sadly, in astonishment at the realiza- 
tion. “Yes, l guess that’s all . . . Except, tell Hank Rearden what 
happened and that 1 asked you to tell him.” 

“I will.” 

She lifted her head and said firmly, “I don’t expect it to happen, 
however. When you reach Laurel, call Winston, Colorado, and tell 
them that I will be there tomorrow by noon.” 

“Yes, Miss Taggart ” 

She wanted to extend her hand in parting, but it seemed inadequate, 
and then she remembered what he had said about times of loneliness 
She took out the package and silently offered him one of his own 
cigarettes. His smile was a full statement of understanding, and the 
small flame of his match lighting their two cigarettes was their most 
enduring handshake. 

r Iben she climbed aboard — and the next span of her consciousness 
was not separate moments and movements, but the sweep of a single 
motion and a single unit of time, a progression forming one entity, 
like the notes of a piece of music: from the touch of her hand on the 
starter — to the blast of the motor’s sound that broke off, like a moun- 
tain rockslide, all contact with the time behind her -to the circling 
fall of a blade that vanished in a fragile, sparkle of whirling air that 
cut the space ahead- to the start for the runway — to the brief pause — 
then to the forward thrust — to the long, ^perilous run, the run not to 
be obstructed, the straight line run that fathers power by spending it 
on a harder and harder and ever-accelerating effort, the straight fine 
to a purpose — to the moment, unnoticed, when the earth drops off 
and the line, unbroken, goes on into space in the simple natural act 
of rising. 

She saw the telegraph wires of the trat&side slipping past at the tip 
of her toes. The earth was falling downward, and she felt as if its 

634 



weight were dropping off her ankles, as if the globe would go shrink- 
ing to the size of a ball, a convict’s ball she had dragged and lost. 
Her body swayed, drunk with the shock of a discovery, and the craft 
rocked with her body, and it was the earth below that reeled with the 
rocking of her craft— the discovery that her life was now in her own 
hands, that there was no necessity to argue, to explain, to teach, to 
plead, to fight — nothing but to see and think and act. Then the earth 
steadied into a wide sheet that grew wider and wider as she circled, 
rising When she glanced down for the last time, the lights of the field 
were extinguished, there was only the single beacon left and it looked 
like (he tip of Kellogg’s cigarette, glowing as a last salute in the 
darkness. 

Then she was Jeif with the lights on her instrument panel and the 
spread of stars beyond her film of glass, there was nothing to support 
heT but the beat of the engine and the minds of the men who had 
made ihe plane. But what else supports one anywhere 7 - -she thought, 

fhe line of her course went northwest, to cut a diagonal across the 
state of Colorado. She knew' she had chosen the most dangerous route, 
over too long a stretch of the worst mountain barrier —but it was the 
shortest line, and safety lay in altitude, and no mountains seemed 
dangerous compared to the dispatcher of Bradshaw, 

The stars were like foam and the sk\ seemed full of flowing motion, 
the motion of bubbles settling and forming, the floating of circular 
waves without progression A spatk of light flared up on earth once 
in a while, and it seemed brighter than all the static blue above. But 
it hung alone, between the black of ashes and the blue of a crypt, it 
seemed to tight for iis fragile foothold, it greeted her and went. 

The pale streak ol a river came rising slowly from the void, and lor 
a long stretch of time it remained in sight, gliding imperceptibly to 
meet her It looked like a phosphorescent vein showing through the 
skin of the earth a delicate vein without blood. 

When she saw the lights of a town, like a handful of gold coins 
flung upon the prairie, the brightly violent lights fed by an electric 
current, they seemed as distant as the stars and now as unattainable. 
The energy that had lighted them was gone, the power that created 
power stations in empty prairies had vanished, and she knew of no 
journey to recapture it. Yet these had been her stars — she thought, 
kxiking down — these had been her goal, her beacon, the aspiration 
drawing her upon her upward course. That which others claimed to 
feel at the sight of the stars— stars safely distant by millions of years 
and thus imposing no obligation to act, but serving as the tinsel of 
futility — she had felt at the sight of electric bulbs lighting the streets 
of a town, It was this earth below that had been the height she wanted 
to reach, and she wondered how she had come to lose it, who had 
made of it a convict’s ball to drag through muck, who had turned its 
promise of greatness into a vision never to be reached. But the town 
was past, and she had to look ahead, to the mountains of Colorado 
rising in her way. 

The small glass dial on her panel showed that she was now climbing. 
The sound of the engine, beating through the metal shell around her, 
trembling in the wheel against her palms, like the pounding of a heart 

635 



strained to a solemn effort, told her of the power carrying her above 
the peaks. The earth was now a crumpled sculpture that swayed from 
side to side, the shape of an explosion still shooting sudden spurts to 
reach the plane. She saw them as dented black cuts ripping through 
the milky spread of stars, straight in her path and tearing wider. Her 
mind one with her body and her body one with the plane, she fought 
the invisible suction drawing her downward, she fought the sudden 
gusts that tipped the earth as if she were about to roll off into the 
sky, with half of the mountains rolling alter. It was like fighting a 
frozen ocean where the touch of a single spray would be fatal. 

There were stretches of rest when the mountains shrank down, over 
valleys tilled with fog. Then the fog rose higher to swallow the earth 
and she was left suspended in space, left motionless but for the sound 
of the engine. 

But she did not need to see the earth. The instrument panel was 
now her power of sight — it was the condensed sight of the best minds 
able to guide her on her way. Their condensed sight, she thought, 
offeied to hers and requiring only that she be able to read it. How 
had they been paid for it, they, the sight-givers? From condensed milk 
to condensed music to the condensed sight of precision instruments— 
what wealth had they not given to the world and what had they 
received in return? Where were they now? Where was Dwight Sand- 
ers? Where was the inventor of her motor? 

"Hie fog was lifting — and in a sudden clearing, she saw a drop of 
fire on a spread of rock. It was not an electric light, it was a lonely 
flame in the darkness of the earth. She knew where she was and she 
knew that flame: it was Wyatt's Torch 

She was coming close to her goal. Somewhere behind her, in the 
northeast, stood the summits pierced by the Taggart Tunnel. The 
mountains were sliding in a long descent into the steadier soil of Utah. 
She let her plane slip closer to the earth. 

The stars were vanishing, the sky was growing darker, but in the 
bank of clouds to the east thin cracks were beginning to appear— first 
as threads, then faint spots of reflection, then straight bands that were 
not yet pink, but no longer blue, the color of a future light, the first 
hints of the coming sunrise. I hey kept appearing and vanishing, slowly 
growing dearer, leaving the sky darker, then breaking it wider apart, 
like a promise struggling to be fulfilled. She heard a piece of music 
beating in her mind, one she seldom liked to recall: not Halley's Fifth 
Concerto, but his Fourth, the cry of a tortured struggle, with the chords 
of its theme breaking through, like a distant vision to be reached. 

She saw the Afton airport from across a span of miles, first as a 
square of sparks, then as a sunburst of white rays. It was lighted for 
a plane about to take off, and she had to Wait for her landing. Circling 
in the outer darkness above the field, $ie saw the silver body of a 
plane rising like a phoenix out of the white fire and— -in a straight 
line, almost leaving an instant’s trail of |ght to hang in space behind 
it— going off toward the east. 

Then she swept down in its stead, to dive into the luminous funnel 
of beams — she saw a strip of cement flying at her face, she felt the 
jolt of the wheels stopping it in time, then the streak of her motion 

636 



ebbing out and the plane being tamed to the safety of a car, as it 
taxied smoothly off the runway. 

It was a small private airfield, serving the meager traffic of a few 
industrial concerns still remaining in Afton. She saw a lone attendant 
hurrying to meet her. She leaped down to the ground the moment 
the plane stood still, the hours of the flight swept from her mind by 
the impatience over the stretch erf a few more minutes. 

“Can 1 get a car somewhere to drive me to the Institute of Technol- 
ogy at once?” she asked. 

The attendant looked at her, puzzled. “Why, yes, 1 guess so, ma’ani. 
But ... but what for? There’s nobody there." 

"Mr. Quentin Daniels is there.” 

The attendant shook his head slowly — then jerked his thumb, point- 
ing east to the shrinking taillights of the plane. "There's Mr. Daniels 
going now." 

-What?'' 

"He just left.” 

“Left? Why?” 

“He went with the man who flew in for him two-three hours ago.” 

"What man?" 

"Don’t know, never saw him before, but, boy! — he’s got a beauty 
of a ship!" 

She was back at the wheel, she was speeding down the runway, she 
was rising into the air, her plane like a bullet aimed at two sparks of 
red and green light that were twinkling away into the eastern sky — 
while she was still repeating, "Oh no, they don't! They don’t! They 
don't! They don't!" 

Once and for all— she thought, clutching the wheel as it it were the 
enemy not to be relinquished, her words like separate explosions with 
a trail ol lire in her mind to link them —once and for all ... to meet 
the destroyer face to face . . to learn who he is and where he goes 
to vanish . . . not the motor . . he is not to carry the motor away 
into the darkness of his monstrously closed unknown ... he is not to 
escape, this time. . . 

A band of light was rising in the east and it seemed to come from 
the eaith, as a breath long-held and released. In the deep blue above 
it, the stranger’s plane was a single spark changing color and flashing 
from side to side, like the up ol a pendulum swinging in the darkness, 
beating time. 

The curve of distance made the spark drop closer to the earth, and 
she pushed her throttle wide open, not to let the spark out of her 
sight , not to let it touch the horizon and vanish. The light was flowing 
into the sky. as if drawn from the earth by the stranger’s plane. The 
plane was headed southeast, and she was following it into the com- 
ing sunrise. 

From the transparent green of ice, the sky melted into pale gold, 
and the gold spread into a lake under a fragile film of pink glass, the 
color of that forgotten morning which was the fu>t she had seen on 
earth. The clouds were dropping away in long shreds of smoky blue, 
She kept her eyes on the stranger’s plane, as if her glance were a 

637 



towline pulling her ship. The stranger's plane was now a* small black 
cross, like a shrinking check mark on the glowing sky. 

Then she noticed that the clouds were not dropping, that they stood 
congealed on the edge of the earth — and she realized that the plane 
was headed toward the mountains of Colorado, that the struggle against 
the invisible storm lay ahead for her once more. She noted it without 
emotion: she did not wonder whether her ship or her body had the 
power to attempt it again. So long as she was able to move, she would 
move to follow the speck that was fleeing away with the last of her 
world She felt nothing but the emptiness left by a tire that had been 
hatred and anger and the desperate impulse of a fight to the kill; these 
had fused into a single icy streak, the single resolve to follow the 
stranger, whoever he was, wherever he took her, to follow and . . . she 
added* nothing in her mind, but unstated, what lay at the bottom of 
the emptiness was: and give her life, if she could take his first. 

Like an instrument set to automatic control, her body was performing 
the motions of driving the plane— with the mountains reeling in a bluish 
fog below and the dented peaks rising in her path as smoky formations 
of a deadlier blue. She noticed that the distance to the stranger’s plane 
had shrunk: he had checked his speed for the dangerous crossing, while 
she had gone on, unconscious of the danger, with only the muscles of 
her arms and legs fighting to keep her plane aloft. A briet. tight move- 
ment of her lips was as dose as she could cotnc to a smile: it was he 
who was flying her plane for her, she thought; he had given her the 
power to follow him with a somnambulist’s unerring skill. 

As it responding of itself to his control, the needle of her altimeter 
was slowly moving upward. She was rising and she went on lising and 
she wondered when her breath and her propeller would fail. He was 
going southeast, toward the highest mountains that obstructed the 
path of the sun. 

It was his plane that was struck by the first sun ray. It flashed for 
an instant, like a burst of white lire, sending rays to shoot from its 
wings. The peaks of the mountains came next: she saw the sunlight 
reaching the snow' in the crevices, then trickling down the granite 
sides; it cut violent shadows on the ledges and brought the mountains 
into the living finality of a form. 

They were flying over the wildest stietch of Colorado, uninhabited, 
uninhabitable, inaccessible to men on foot or plane. No landing was 
possible within a radius of a hundred miles; she glanced at her fuel 
gauge: she had one half-hour left. The stranger was heading straight 
toward another, higher range. She wondered why he chose a course 
no air route did or ever would travel. $he wished this range were 
behind her; it was the last effort she coujd hope to make. 

The stranger’s plane was suddenly slacking its speed. He was losing 
altitude just when she had expected him |o climh. The granite barrier 
was rising in his path, moving to meet fiim, reaching for his Wings, 
but the long, smooth line of his motion $yas sliding down. She could 
detect no break, no joit, no sign of mechanical failure: it looked like 
the even movement of a controlled intention. With a sudden flash of 
sunlight on its wings, the plane banked info a long curve, rays dripping 

638 



like water from its body — then went into the broad, smooth circles of 
a spiral, as if circling for a landing where no landing was conceivable* 

She watched, not trying to* explain it, not believing what she saw, 
waiting for the upward thrust that would throw him back on his 
course. But the easy, gliding circles went on dropping, toward a 
ground she could not see and dared not think of. Like remnants of 
broken jaws, strings of granite dentures stood between her ship and 
his; she could not tell what lay at the bottom of his spiral motion* 
She knew only that it did not look like, but was certain to be, the 
motion of a suicide. 

She saw the sunlight glitter on his wings for an instant. 7tten. like 
the body of a man diving chest-first and arms outstretched, serenely 
abandoned to the sweep of the fall, the plane went down and vanished 
behind the ridges of rock. 

She flew on, almost waiting for it to reappear, unable to believe 
that she had witnessed a horrible catastrophe taking place so simply 
and quietly. She flew on to where the plane had dropped. It seemed 
to be a valley in a ring of granite walls. 

She reached the valley and looked down. There was no possible 
place for a landing. There was no sign of a plane. 

The bottom of the valley looked like a stretch of the earth’s crust 
mangled in the days when the earth was cooling, left irretrievable ever 
since. It was a stretch of rocks ground against one another, with boul- 
ders hanging in precarious formations, with long, dark crevices and a 
few contorted pine trees growing ha If- horizon tally into the air. There 
was no level piece oi soil the size of a handkerchief There was no 
place for a plane to hide. There was no remnant of a plane’s wreck. 

She banked sharply, circling above the valley, dropping down a 
little. By some trick of light, which she could not explain, the floot of 
the valley seemed more clearly visible than the rest of the earth. She 
could distinguish it well enough to know that the plane was not there; 
yet this was not possible. 

She circled, dropping down farther. She glanced around her — and 
for one frightening moment, she thought that it was a quiet summer 
morning, that she was alone, lost in a region of the Rocky Mountains 
which no plane should ever venture to approach, and, with the last 
ot her fuel burning away, she was looking for a plane that had never 
existed, m quest of a destioyer who had vanished as he always van- 
ished; perhaps it was only his vision that had led her here to be 
destroyed. In the next moment, she shook her head, pressed her 
mouth tighter and dropped farther. 

She thought that she could not abandon an incalculable wealth such 
as the brain of Quentin Daniels on one of those rocks below, if he 
was still alive and within her reach to help. She had dropped inside 
the circle of the valley’s walls. It was a dangerous job of flying, the 
space was much too tight, but she went on circling and dropping lower, 
her life hanging on her eyesight, and her eyesight flashing between two 
tasks: searching the floor of the valley and watching the granite walls 
that seemed about to rip her wings. 

She knew the danger only its part of the job. It had no personal 
meaning any longer. The savage thing she felt was almost enjoyment. 

639 



It was the last rage of a lost battle. No! — she was crying in her mind, 
crying it to the destroyer, to the world she had left, to the years 
behind her, to the long progression of defeat — No! . . . No! . . . No! . . . 

Her eyes swept past the instrument panel — and then she sat still 
but for the sound of a gasp. Her altimeter had stood at 11,000 feet 
the last time she remembered seeing it. Now it stood at 10,000. But 
the floor of the valley had not changed. It had come no closer. It 
remained as distant as her first glance down. 

She knew that the figure 8,000 meant the level of the ground in 
this part of Colorado, She had not noticed the length of her descent. 
She had not noticed that the ground, which had seemed too clear and 
too close from the height, was now too dim and too tar. She was 
looking at the same rocks from the same perspective, they had grown 
no larger, their shadows had not moved, and the oddly unnatural light 
still hung over the bottom of the valley. 

She thought that her altimeter was off, and she went on circling 
downward. She saw the needle of her dial moving down, she saw the 
walls of granite moving up, she saw the ring of mountains growing 
higher, its peaks coming closer together in the sky— but the floor of 
the valley remained unchanged, as if she were dropping down a well 
with a bottom never to be reached. The needle moved to 9,500— to 
9300— to 9,000 — to 8,700, 

The flash of light that hit her had no source. It was as if the air 
within and beyond the plane became an explosion ot blinding cold 
fire, sudden and soundless, lire shock threw her back, her hands off 
the wheel and over her eyes. In the break of an instant, when she 
seized the wheel again, the light was gone, but her ship was spinning, 
her ears were bursting with silence and her propeller stood stiffly 
straight before her: her motor was dead. 

She tried to pull for a rise, but the ship was going down — and what 
she saw flying at her face was not the spread of mangled boulders, but 
the green grass of a field where no field had been before. There was 
no time to see the rest. There was no time to think of explanations. 
There W'as no time to come out of the spin. The earth was a green 
ceiling coming down upon her, a few hundred swiftly shrinking feet 
away 

Flung from side to side, like a battered pendulum, clinging to the 
wheel, half in her seat, half on her knees, she fought to pull the ship 
into a glide, for an attempt to make a belly-landing, while the green 
ground was whirling about her, sweeping above her, then below, its 
spiral coils coming closer. Her anus pulling at the wheel, with no 
chance to know whether .she could succeed, with her space and lime 
running out — she felt, in a flash of its full, violent purity, that special 
sense of existence which had always beeri hers. In a moment’s conse- 
cration to her love — to her rebellious denial of disaster, to her love 
of life and of the matchless value that was herself — she felt the fiercely 
proud certainty that she would survive. 

And in answer to the earth that flew to meet her, she heard in her 
mind, as her mockery at fate, as her cry |>t defiance, the words of the 
sentence she hated-— the words of defeat, of despair and of a plea 
for help: 

“Oh hell! Who is John Galt?” 


640 



PART THREE 






Chapter I ATLANTIS 

When she opened her eyes, she saw sunlight, green leaves and a 
man’s taco. She thought' 1 know what this is. This was the world as 
she had expected to see it at sixteen— -and now she had reached it — 
and it seemed so simple, so unastomshing, that the thing she fell was 
like a blessing pronounced upon the universe by means ol three 
woids: But of course. 

She was looking up at the taco of a man who knelt by her side, 
and she knew that in all the years behind her, this was what she 
would have given her life to see. a face that bore no mark of pain 
or lear or guilt. The shape of his mouth was pride, and more: it was 
as if he took pride in being proud The angular planes ot his cheeks 
made her think of arrogance, ot tension, ol scorn — yet the face had 
none of these qualities, it had their final sum: a look of serene deter- 
mination and ot ceitainty. and the look of a ruthless innocence which 
would not seek foigiveness or grant it. H was a face that had nothing 
to hide or to escape, a face with no tear of being seen or of seeing, 
so that the first thing she grasped about him was the intense percep- 
tive ness of his eyes— he looked as if his faculty of sight were his 
best-loved tool and its exercise were a limitless, joyous adventure, 
as if his eyes imparted a superlative value to himself and to the 
world- -to himself for his ability to see, to the world tor being a 
place so eagerly worth seeing. It seemed to her for a moment that 
she was in the presence of a being who was pure consciousness — 
yet she had never been so aware of a man’s body. Hie light cloth 
of his shiit seemed to stress, rather than hide, the structure of his 
figure, his skin was suntanned, his body had the hardness, the gaunt 
tensile strength, the clean precision of a foundry casting, he looked 
as if he were poured out of metal, but some dimmed, soft-lustered 
metal, like an aluminum copper alloy, the color of his skin blending 
with the chest nut-brown of his hair, the loose strands of the hair 
shading from brown to gold in the sun, and his eves completing the 
colors, as the one part of the casting left undimmed and hardly lus- 
trous: his eyes were the deep, dark green of light glinting on metal. 
He was looking down at her with the faint trace of a smile, it was 
not a look of discovery, but of familiar contemplation — as if he, too, 
wore seeing the long-expected and the never-doubted. 

643 



This was her world, she thought, this was the way meo were meant 
to be and to face their existence — and all the rest of it, all the years 
of ugliness and struggle were only someone’s senseless joke. She 
smiled at him, as at a fellow conspirator, in relief, in deliverance, in 
radiant mockery of all the things she would never have to consider 
important again. He smiled in answer, it was the same smile as her 
own, as if he fell what she felt and knew what she meant. 

“We never had to take any of it seriously, did wc?” she whispered. 

“No, we never had to.” 

And then, her consciousness returning fully, she realized that this 
man was a total stranger. 

She tried to draw away from him, but it was only a taint movcmcnl 
of her head on the grass she felt under her hair. She tried to rise, 
A shot of pain across her back threw her down again 

“Don’t move. Miss Taggart. You’re hurt.” 

“You know me?” Her voice was impersonal and hard. 

“I’ve known you for many years.” 

“Have I known you?” 

“Yes, 1 think so.” 

“What is your name?” 

“John Galt.” 

She looked at him, not moving. 

“Why are you frightened?” he asked. 

“Because 1 believe it.” 

He smiled, as if grasping a full confession of the meaning she 
attached to his name; the smile held an adversary’s acceptance of a 
challenge — and an adult’s amusement at the self-deception of a child. 

She felt as if she were returning to consciousness after a crash that 
had shattered more than an airplane. She could not reassemble the 
pieces now, she could not recall the things she had known about his 
name, she knew only that it stood for a dark vacuum which she 
would slowly have to fill. She could not do it now, this man was too 
blinding a presence, like a spotlight that would not let her see the 
shapes strewn in the outer darkness. 

“Was it you that 1 was following?” she asked. 

“Yes.” 

She glanced slowly around her. She was lying in the grass of a 
field at the foot of a granite drop that came down from thousands 
of feet away in the blue sky. On the other edge of the field, some 
crags and pines and the glittering leaves ol birch trees hid the space 
that stretched to a distant wall of encircling mountains. Her plane 
was not shattered — it was there, a few {eet away, fiat on its belly in 
the grass. There was no other plane in sight, no structures, no sign 
of human habitation. 

“What is this valley?” she asked. 

He smiled. “The Taggart Terminal.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“You’ll find out.” 

A dim impulse, like the recoil of an antagonist, made her want to 
check on what strength was left to her. She could move her arms 
and kgs; she could lift her head; she felt a stabbing pain when she 

644 



breathed deeply; she saw a thin thread of blood running down her 
stocking. 

“Can one get out of this place?’’ she asked. 

His voice seemed earnest, but the glint of the metal-green eyes 
was a smile: “Actually — no. Temporarily — yes.” 

She made a movement to rise. He bent to lift her, but she gathered 
her strength in a swift, sudden jolt and slipped out of his grasp, 
struggling to stand up. “1 think 1 can — ” she started saying, and 
collapsed against him the instant her feet rested on the ground, a 
stab of pain shooting up from an ankle that would not hold her. 

He lifted her in his arms and smiled, “No. you can’t. Miss Tag- 
gart,’’ he said, and started off across the field. 

She lay still, her arms about him, her head on his shoulder, and 
she thought: For just a few moments — while this lasts — it is all right 
to surrender completely — to forget everything and just permit your- 
self to feel. . . When had she experienced it before? — she wondered; 
there had been a moment when these had been the words in her 
mind, but she could not remember it now. She had known it, once — 
this feeling of certainty, of the final, the reached, the not-to-be-ques- 
tioned. But it was new to feci protected, and to feci that it was right 
to accept the protection, to surrender— right, because this peculiar 
sense of safety was not protection againsi the luture. but against the 
past, not the protection of being spared from battle, but of having 
won it, not a protection granted to her weakness, but to her 
strength. . . Aware with abnormal intensity of the pressure of his 

hands against her body, of the gold and copper threads of his hair, 
the shadows of his lashes on the skin of lus face a lew inches away 
from hers, she wondered dimly* Protected, from what? . . . it’s he 
who was the enemy . . was he? . . why? . . She did not know, 
she could not think of it now It took an effort to remember that 
she had had a goal and a motive a few hours ago. She forced herself 
to lecapture it. 

“Did vou know that I was following you?” she asked, 

“No.” 

“Where is your plane 0 '* 

“At the landing field.” 

“Where is the landing field?" 

“On the other side of the valley.” 

“There was no landing field m this valley, when l looked down. 
There as no meadow, either. How did it get here 0 ” 

He glanced at the sky. “Look carefully. Do you see anything up 
there?” 

She dropped her head back, looking straight into the sky, seeing 
nothing but the peaceful blue ol morning. After a while she distin- 
guished a few faint strips of shimmering air. 

“Heat waves.” she said. 

“Refractor rays,” he answered. "The valley bottom that you saw is 
a mountain top eight thousand feet high, five miles away from here.” 

“A . . . what?” 

“A mountain top that no flyer would ever choose for a landing. 
What you saw was its reflection projected over this valley.” 

645 



“How?" 

“By the same method as a mirage on a desert: an image refracted 
from a layer of heated air." 

“How?" 

“By a set eon of rays calculated against everything — except a cour- 
age such as yours." 

“What do you mean?” 

“I never thought that any plane would attempt to drop within 
seven hundred feet of the ground. You hit the ray screen. Some of 
the rays are the kind that kill magnetic motors. Well, that’s the 
second time you beat me: I've never been followed, either." 

“Why do you keep that screen?" 

“Because this place is private property intended to remain as 
such." 

“What is this place?" 

“I’ll show it to you, now that you’re here. Miss Taggart. I’ll answer 
questions after you’ve seen it." 

She remained silent. She noticed that she had asked questions 
about every subject, but not about him. It was as if he were a single 
whole, grasped by her first glance at him, like some irreducible abso- 
lute, like an axiom not to be explained any lurther, as if she knew 
everything about him by direct perception, and what awaited her 
now was only the process ot identifying her knowledge. 

He was carrying her down a narrow trail that went winding to the 
bottom of the valley. On the slopes around them, the tall, dark pyra- 
mids of llrs stood immovably straight, in masculine simplicity, like 
sculpture reduced to an essential form, and they clashed with the 
complex, feminine, overdet ailed lace-work of the birch leaves 
trembling in the sun. The leaves let the sunrays fall through to sweep 
across his hair, acioss both their faces. She could not see what lay 
below, beyond the turns ot the trail. 

Her eyes kept coming back to his lace. He glanced down at her 
once in a while. At first, she looked away, as if she had been caught. 
Then, as if learning it from him, she held his glance whenever he 
chose to look down— knowing that he knew what she Icll and that 
he did not hide from hei the meaning of his glance. 

She knew that his silence was the same confession as her own. He 
did not hold her in the impersonal manner of a man carrying a 
wounded woman. It was an embrace, even though she felt no sugges- 
tion of it in his bearing; she felt it only by means ot her certainty 
that his whole body was aware of holding hers. 

She heard the sound of the waterfall before she saw the fragile 
thread that tell in broken strips of glitter down the ledges. The sound 
came through some dim beat in her njind. some taint rhythm that 
seemed no louder than a struggling memory-- but they went past and 
the beat remained, she listened to the! sound of the water, but an- 
other sound seemed to grow clearer, Rising, not in her mind, but 
from somewhere among the leaves. Th<$ trail turned, and in a sudden 
clearing she saw a small house on a Mge below, with a flash of sun 
on the pane of an open window. In the moment when she knew what 
experience had once made her want to surrender to the immediate 

646 



present — it had been the night in a dusty coach of the Comet, when 
she had heard the theme of Halley's Fifth Concerto for "the first 
time — she knew that she was hearing it now, hearing it rise from the 
keyboard of a piano, in the clear, sharp chords of someone’s power- 
ful, confident touch 

She snapped the question at his face, as if hoping to catch him 
unprepared: “That’s the Fifth Concerto bv Richard Hallcv. isn’t it?” 

“Yes.” 

“When did he write it?” 

“Why don’t you ask him that in person?” 

“Is he here?” 

“It's he who’s playing it. That's his house.” 

“Oh . . . !” 

“You’ll meet him, later. He'll he glad to speak to you. He knows 
that his works are the only records you like to play, in the evening, 
when you are alone ” 

“How does he know that?” 

“I told him ” 

The look on her face was like a question that would have begun 
with “How in hell . . . ?” — but she saw the look of his eyes, and she 
laughed, her laughter giving sound to the meaning of his glance 

She could not question anything, she thought, she could not doubt, 
not now- -not with the sound of that music rising triumphantly 
thiough the sun-drenched leaves, the music of release, of deliverance, 
played as it was intended to he played, as her mind had struggled 
to hear it in a rocking coach through the beat ot wounded wheels — 
it was this that her mind had seen m the sounds, that night— this 
valley and the morning sun and — 

And then she gasped, because the trail had turned and from the 
height of an open ledge she saw the town on the floor of the valley. 

It was not a town, only a cluster of houses scattered at random 
from the bottom to the rising steps of the mountains that went on 
rising above their roofs, enclosing them within an abrupt, impassable 
circle They were homes, small and new, with naked, angular shapes 
and the glitter of broad windows Far in the distance, some structures 
seemed taller, and the faint coils of smoke above them suggested an 
industrial district But close before her, rising on a slender granite 
column from a ledge below to the level of her eyes, blinding her by 
its glare, dimming the rest, stood a dollar sign three feet tall, made 
of solid gold. It hung in space above the town, as its coat-of-arms, 
its trademark, its beacon — and it caught the sunrays, like some trans- 
mitter of energy that sent them in shining blessing to stretch horizon- 
tally through the air above the roofs. 

“What's that?” she gasped, pointing at (he sign. 

“Oh, that's Francisco's private joke.” 

“Francisco — who?” she whispered, knowing the answer. 

“Francisco d’Anconia.” 

“Is he here, too?” 

“He will be, any day now.” 

“What do you mean, his joke?” 

“He gave that sign as an anniversary present to the owner of this 

647 



place. And then we all adopted it as our particular emblem. We 
liked the idea.” 

“Aren’t you the owner of this place?” 

‘*1? No.” He glanced down at the foot of the ledge and added, 
pointing, “There’s the owner of this place, coining now.” 

A car stopped at the end of a dirt road below, and two men were 
hurrying up the trail. She coil Id not distinguish their faces; one of 
them was slender and tall, the other shorter, more muscular. She lost 
sight of them behind the twists of the trail, as he went on carrying her 
down to meet them. 

She met them when they emerged suddenly from behind a rocky 
comer a few feet away. The sight of their faces hit her with the 
abruptness of a collision. 

“Well, I’ll be goddamned!” said the muscular man, whom she did 
not know, staring at her. 

She was staring at the tall, distinguished figure of his companion* 
it was Hugh Akston. 

It was Hugh Akston who spoke first, bowing to her with a courte- 
ous smile of welcome. “Miss Taggart, this is the first lime anyone 
has ever proved me wrong. I didn’t know- ‘•when l told you you’d 
never find him— that the next time I saw you. you would he in his 
arms.” 

“In whose arms?” 

“Why, the inventor of the motor ” 

She gasped, closing her eyes; this was one connection she knew 
she should have made. When she opened her eyes, she was looking 
at Galt. He was smiling, faintly, derisively, as if he knew fully what 
this meant to her. 

“It would have served you right it you’d broken your neck!” the 
muscular man snapped at her, with the anger of concern, almost of 
affection. “What a stunt to pull — for a person who’d have been ad- 
mitted here so eagerly, il she’d chosen to come through the front 
door!” 

“Miss Taggart, may 1 present Midas Mulligan?” said Galt 

“Oh,” she said weakly, and laughed; she had no capacity for as- 
tonishment any longer. “Do you suppose l was killed in that crash ~ 
and this is some other kind of existence?” 

“It L\ another kind ol existence,” said Galt “Rut as ior being 
killed, doesn’t it seem more like the other way around?” 

“Oh yes,” she whispered, “yes . . She smiled at Mulligan. 
“Where is the front door?” 

“Here,” he said, pointing to his forehead. 

“I’ve lost the key,” she said simply, vtfithout resentment. “I've lost 
all keys, right now.” • 

“YouTl find them. But what in blades were you doing in that 
plane?” ' 

“Following,” 

"Him?” He pointed at Galt. 

“Yes.” 

“You're lucky to be alive! Are you badly hurt?” 

“1 don’t think so.” 


648 



“You’ll have a few questions to answer, after they patch you up.” 
He turned brusquely, leading the way down to the car, then glanced 
at Galt. “Well, what do we do now? There's something we hadn’t 
provided for: the first scab.” 

“The first . . . what?” she asked. 

“Skip it,” said Mulligan, and looked at Galt, “What do we do?” 

“It will be my charge,” said Galt. “1 will be responsible. You take 
Quentin Daniels.” 

“Oh. he’s no problem at all. He needs nothing but to get ac- 
quainted with the place. He seems to know all the rest.” 

“Yes. He had practically gone the whole way by himself.” He saw 
her watching him in bewilderment, and said, “There’s one thing I 
must thank you for. Miss Taggart: you did pay me a compliment 
when you chose Quentin Daniels as my understudy. He was a plausi- 
ble one.” 

“Where is he?” she asked “Will you tell me what happened?” 

“Why. Midas met us at the landing field, drove me to my house 
and took Daniels with him. I was going to join them tor breakfast, 
but I saw your plane spinning and plunging for that pasture. 1 was 
the closest one to the scene.” 

“We got here as fast as we could.” said Mulligan. “I thought he 
deserved to get himself killed -whoever was in that plane. I never 
dreamed that it was one of the only two persons in the whole world 
whom I'd exempt.” 

“Who is the other one ,; ” she asked 

“Hank Rearden.” 

She winced; it was like a sudden blow from another great distance. 
She wondered why it seemed to her that Galt was watching her 
lace intently and that she saw an instant’s change in his, too brief 
to detine. 

Hiey had come to the car. It was a Hammond convertible, its top 
down, one ot the costliest models, some years old, but kept in the 
shining trim of efficient handling. Galt placed her cautiously in the back 
seal and held her in the circle of his arm. She felt a stabbing pain 
once in a while, but she had no attention to spare for it. She watched 
the distant houses of the town, as Mulligan pressed the starter and 
the ear moved forward as they went past the sign of the dollar and 
a golden ray hit her eyes, sweeping over her forehead. 

“Who is the owner of this place?” she asked. 

“1 am,” said Mulligan. 

“What is he r ' She pointed to Galt. 

Mulligan chuckled. “He just works here.” 

“And you. Dr, Akston?” she asked. 

He glanced at Galt. “I'm one of his two fathers. Miss Taggart, 
l he one who didn't betray him.” 

‘Oh!” she said, as another connection tell into place. “Your 
third pupil?” 

“That's right.” 

“The second assistant bookkeeper!” she moaned suddenly, at one 
more memory. 

“What’s that?” 


649 



‘"That’s what Dr. Stadler called him. That’s what Dr. Stadler told 
me he thought this third pupil had become.” 

“He overestimated,” said Galt. “I’m much lower than that by the 
scale of his standards and of his world.” 

The car had swerved into a lane rising toward a lonely house that 
stood on a ridge above the valley. .She saw a man walking down a 
path, ahead of them, hastening in the direction of the town He wore 
blue denim overalls and carried a lunchbox. There was something 
faintly familiar in the swift abruptness of his gait. As the car went 
past him. she caught a glimpse of his face — and she jerked backward, 
her voice rising to a scream from the pain ol the movement and 
from the shock of the sight: “Oh, stop! Stop! Don’t let him go!” It 
was Ellis Wyatt. 

The three men laughed, but Mulligan stopped the car “Oh . 
she said weakly, in apology, realizing she had forgotten that this was 
the place from which Wyatt would not vanish. 

Wyatt was running toward them: he had recognized her, too. When 
he seized the edge of the car, to brake his speed, she saw the face 
and the young, triumphant smile that she had seen but once before: 
on the platform of Wyatt Junction. 

“Dagny! You, too, at last? One of us?” 

“No.” said Galt. “Miss Taggart is a castaway.” 

"Whal?" 

“Miss Taggart's plane crashed Didn't you sec it?” 

“ Crashed— here?'" 

“Yes.” 

“I heard a plane, but I . . His look of bewilderment changed 
to a smile, regretful, amused and friendly “1 see. Oh. hell, Dagny, 
it’s preposterous!” 

She was staring at him helplessly, unable to reconnect the past to 
the present. And helplessly— as one would say to a dead friend, m 
a dream, the words one regrets having missed the chance to sav in 
life — she said, with the memory of a telephone ringing, unansweied, 
almost two years ago, the words she had hoped to say if she ever 
caught sight of him again, “I ... I tried to teach you.” 

He smiled gently. “We’ve been trying to reach you ever since, 
Dagny. . . . I’ll see you tonight. Don’t worry, I won’t vanish — and I 
don't think you will, either ” 

He waved to the others and went off, swinging his lunchbox. She 
glanced up, as Mulligan started the car, and saw Galt's eyes watching 
her attentively. Her face hardened, as if in open admission of pain 
and in defiance ol the satisfaction it might give him. “All right,” she 
said. “I see what sort of show you want to put me through the shock 
of witnessing.” ; 

But there was neither cruelty nor $ity in his face, only the level 
look of justice. “Our first rule here. Mjiss Taggart,” he answered, “is 
that one must always see for oneself.’? 

The car stopped in front of the lonejy house. It was built of rough 
granite blocks, with a sheet of glass fjbr most of its front wall, “Til 
send the doctor over,” said Mulligan, driving off, while Galt carried 
her up the path. 


650 



“Your house?” she asked, 

“Mine,” he answered, kicking the door open. 

He carried her across the threshold into the glistening space of his 
living room, where shafts of sunlight hit walls of polished pine. She 
saw a few pieces of furniture made by hand, a ceiling of bare rafters, 
an archway open upon a small kitchen with rough shelves, a bare 
wooden tabic and the astonishing sight of chromium glittering on an 
electric stove; the place had the primitive simplicity of a frontiers* 
man’s cabin, reduced to essential necessities, but reduced with a 
super-modern skill. 

He carried her across the sunrays into a small guest room and 
placed her down on a bed. She noticed a window open upon a long 
slant of rocky steps and pines going off into the sky She noticed 
small streaks that looked like inscriptions cut into the wood of the 
walls, a few scattered lines that seemed made by different handwrit- 
ings; she could not distinguish the words She noticed another door, 
left half-open; it led to his bedroom. 

“Am 1 a guest here or a prisoner?” she asked. 

“The choice will be yours. Miss Taggart.” 

“1 can make no choice when I ni dealing with a stranger.” 

“But you’re not. Didn't you name a railroad line after me?” 

“Oh f . . . Yes . . It was the small jolt of another connection 
falling into place. “Yes, 1 — ” She was looking at the tall figure with 
the sun-streaked hair, with the suppressed smile in the mercilessly 
perceptive eyes- - she was seeing the struggle to build her Line and 
the summer day of the first train’s run— she was thinking that if a 
human figure could be fashioned as an emblem of that Line, this 
was the figure “Yes ... 1 did . . Then, remembering the rest she 
added, “But l named it after an enemy.” 

He smiled. “That's the contradiction you had to resolve sooner or 
later Miss Taggart.” 

“It was you . . . wasn't it? . . who destroyed my Line. . . 

“Why, no. It was the contradiction.” 

She closed her eyes, in a moment, she asked, “All those stories 1 
heard about you —which of them are true?” 

“All of them.” 

“Was it you who spread them?” 

“No. What for? 1 never had any wish to be talked about.” 

“But you do know that you've become a legend?” 

“Yes.” 

“The young inventor of the Twentieth Century Motor Company 
is the one real version of the legend, isn’t it?” 

“The one that’s concretely real- -yes.” 

She could not say it indifferently; there was still a breathless tone 
and the drop of her voice, toward a whisper, when she asked, “The 
motor ... the motor I found ... it was you who made it?” 

“Yes.” 

She could not prevent the jolt of eagerness that threw her head 
up. “The secret of transforming energy — ” she began, and stopped. 

“I could tell it to you in fifteen minutes,” he said, in answer to 
the desperate plea she had not uttered, “but there's no power on 

651 



earth that can force me to tell it. If you understand this, you’ll under- 
stand everything that’s baffling you.” 

“That night . . . twelve years ago ... a spring night when you 
walked out of a meeting of six thousand murderers — that story is 
true, isn't it?” 

“Yes.” 

“You told them that you would stop the motor of the world.” 

“I have.” 

“What have you done?” 

*Tve done nothing , Miss Taggart. And that's the whole ot my 
secret.” 

She looked at him silently for a long moment. He stood waiting, 
as if he could read her thoughts. “The destroyer—” she said with a 
tone of wonder and helplessness. 

“ — the most evil creature that’s ever existed,” he said in the tone 
of a quotation, and she recognized her own words, “the man who’s 
draining the brains of the world.” 

“How thoroughly have you been watching me,” she asked, "and 
for how long?” 

It was only an instant’s pause, his eyes did not move, but it seemed 
to her that his glance was stressed, as if in special awareness of 
seeing her, and she caught the sound of some patlicular intensity in 
his voice as he answered quietly, “For years.” 

She closed her eyes, relaxing and giving up. She felt an odd, light 
hearted indifference, as it she suddenly wanted nothing but the com- 
fort of surrendering to helplessness. 

The doctor who arrived was a gray-haired man with a mild, 
thoughtful face and a firmly, uuobtiusively confident manner. 

“Miss Taggart, may I present Dr. Hendricks?” said Gall. 

“Not Dr. Thomas Hendricks?” she gasped, with the involuntary 
rudeness of a child; the name belonged to a great suigeon, who had 
retired and vanished six years ago. 

“Yes, of course.* said Galt 

Dr. Hendricks smiled at her, in answer. “Midas told me that Miss 
Taggart has to be treated for shock.” he said, “not for the one 
sustained, but for the ones to come ” 

‘I'll leave you to do it,” said Galt, ’ while l go to the market to 
get supplies for breakfast.” 

She watched the rapid efficiency of Dr. Hendricks 7 work, as he 
examined her injuries. He had brought an object she had never seen 
before: a portable X-ray machine She learned that she had torn the 
cartilage of two ribs, that she had sprained an ankle, ripped patches 
of skin oil one knee and one elbow, apd acquired a tew bruises 
spread in purple blotches over her body. |*y the time Dr. Hendricks' 
swift, competent hands had wound the bandages and the tight lacings 
of tape, she felt as if her body were an engine checked by an expert 
mechanic, and no further care was necessary. 

“I would advise you to remain in bed* Miss Taggart.” 

“Oh no! If I’m careful and move slowly. I'll be all right.” 

“You ought to rest.” 

“Do you think I can?” 


652 



He smiled, “I guess not.” 

She was dressed by the time Gait came back. Dr. Hendricks gave 
him an account of her condition, adding, “Til be back to check up, 
tomorrow.” 

“Thanks,” said Galt. “Send the bill to me.” 

“C ertainly not!” she said indignantly. “I will pay it myself.” 

The two men glanced at each other, in amusement, as at the boast 
of a beggar. 

“We’ll discuss that later,” said Galt. 

Dr. Hendricks left, and she tned to stand up, limping, catching at 
the furniture lor support. Gait lifted her in his arms, carried her to 
the kitchen alcove and placed her on a chair by the table set for two. 

She noticed that she was hungry, at the sight of the coffee pot 
boiling on the stove, the two glasses of orange juice, the heavy white 
pottery dishes sparkling in the sun on the polished table top. 

“When did you sleep or eat last?” he asked. 

“I don’t know ... I had dinner on the train, with — ” She shook 
her head in helplessly bitter amusement: with the tramp, she thought, 
with a desperate voice pleading for escape from an avenger who 
would not pursue or be found— the avenger who sat facing her across 
the table, drinking a glass of orange juice. “I don’t know ... it seems 
centuries and continents away.” 

“How did you happen to be following me?” 

“I landed at the Alton airport just as you were taking off. The 
man Iheie told me that Quentin Daniels had gone with you.” 

“I remember your plane circling to land. But that was the one 
and only time when 1 didn’t think of you. I thought you were coming 
by train.” 

She asked, looking straight at him, “How do you want me to 
understand that?” 

“What?” 

“'I he one and only time when you didn't think of me.” 

He held her glance; she saw the faint movement she had noted as 
typical ot him: the movement of his proudly intractable mouth curv- 
ing into the hint of a smile. “In any way you wish,” he answered. 

She lei a moment pass to underscore her choice by the severity 
oi her lace, then asked coldly, in the tone of an enemy's accusation, 
“You knew that I was coming for Quentin Daniels?” 

“Yes.” 

“You got him first and fast, in order not to let me reach him? In 
order to beat me — knowing fully what sort of beating that would 
mean for me?” 

“Sure.” 

It was she who looked away and remained silent. He rose to cook 
the rest of their breaklast. She watched him as he stood at the stove, 
toasting bread, frying eggs and bacon. There was an easy, relaxed 
skill about the way he worked, but it was a skill that belonged to 
another profession; his hands moved with the rapid precision of an 
engineer pulling the levers of a control board. She remembered sud- 
denly where she had seen as expert and preposterous a performance. 

653 



“Is that what you learned from Dr. Akston?” she asked, pointing 
at the stove. 

‘That, among other things.'’ 

“Did he teach you to spend your time — your time!” she could 
not keep the shudder of indignation out of her voice — “on this sort 
of work?” 

T've spent time on work ot much lesser importance.” 

When he put her plate before her. she asked, “Where did you get 
that food? Do they have a grocery store here?” 

“The best one in the world It’s run by Lawrence Hammond.” 

“What?” 

“Lawrence Hammond, of Hammond Oars, t he bacon is from the 
farm ot Dwight Sanders — of Sanders Aircraft. The eggs and the but- 
ter from Judge Nanagansctt- ot the Superior Court of the State 
of Illinois ” 

She looked at her plate, bitterly, almost as it she were afraid to 
touch it. “It’s the most expensive breakfast I’ll ever eat, considering 
the value of the cook’s time and of all those others.” 

“Yes- -from one aspect. But from another, it's the cheapest break- 
fast you'll ever eat — because no part of it has gone to feed the looters 
who’ll make you pay for it through year after year and leave you to 
starve in the end.” 

After a long silence, she asked simply, almost wistfully, "What is 
it that you’re all doing here?” 

“Living.” 

She had never heard that word sound so real. 

“What is your job?’ she asked. “Midas Mulligan said that you 
work here.” 

“I'm the handy man, I guess.” 

“The what?” 

“I’m on call whenever anything goes wrong with any ol the instal- 
lations — with the power system, for instance.” 

She looked at him — and suddenly she tore forward, staring at the 
electric stove, but fell back on her chair, stopped by pain. 

He chuckled. “Yes, that's true -but take it easy or Dr. Hendricks 
will order you back to bed.” 

“The power system . . .” she said, choking, “the power system 
here . . . it’s run by means of your motor?” 

“Yes.” 

“It’s built? It’s working? It’s functioning?” 

“It has cooked your breakfast.” 

“I want to see it!” 

“Don’t bother crippling yourself to Jook at that stove. It’s just a 
plain electric stove like any other, (^nly about a hundred times 
cheaper to run. And that’s all you'll have a chance to see. Miss 
Taggart.” 

“You promised to show me thL valley.” 

“I’ll show it to you. But not the poier generator,” 

“Will you take me to sec the place now, as soon as we finish*?” 

“If you wish — and if you’re able to move.” 

“I am.” 


654 



He got up, went to the telephone and dialed a number, “Hello, 
Midas? . . . Yes ... He did? Yes, she’s all right. . . . Will you rent 
me your car for the day? . . . Thanks. At the usual rate — twenty* 
five cents. . . . Can you send it over? . . . Do you happen to have 
some sort of cane? She’ll need it. . . . Tonight? Yes, I think so. We 
will. Thanks.” 

He hung up. She was staring at him mciedulousiy. 

“Did 1 understand you to say that Mr. Mulligan— who's worth 
about two hundred million dollars. I believe — is going to charge you 
twenty-five cents for the use of his car?” 

“That’s right/’ 

“Good heavens, couldn’t he give it to you as a courtesy?” 

He sat looking at her for a moment, studying her face, as if deliber- 
ately letting her see the amusement in his. “Miss Taggart/' he said, 
“we have no laws in this valley, no rules, no formal organization of 
any kind. We come here because we want to rest. But we have 
certain customs, which we all observe, because they pertain to the 
things we need to rest from. So I'll warn you now that there is one 
word which is forbidden m this valley: the word l give.’" 

“I’m sorry/’ she said. “You're right.” 

He refilled her cup of coffee and extended a package of cigarettes. 
She smiled, as she took a cigarette: it bore the sign of the dollar. 

"If you're not too tired by evening,” he said, “Mulligan has invited 
us lor dinner. He'll have some guests there whom, 1 think, you’ll 
want to meet.” 

“Oh, ol course! 1 won’t be too tired. 1 don’t think I’ll ever fed 
tired again.” 

They were finishing breakfast when she saw Mulligan's car stop- 
ping in front of the house. The driver leaped out, raced up the path 
and rushed into the room, not pausing to ring or knock. It took her 
a moment to realize that the eager, breathless, disheveled young man 
was Quentin Daniels. 

“Miss Taggart,” he gasped, “I'm sorry’” The desperate guilt in his 
voice clashed with the joyous excitement in his face. “I’ve never 
broken my word befote! There’s no excuse for it, 1 can't ask you to 
lorgive me, and I know that you won’t believe it, but the truth is 
that I — 1 forgot!” 

She glanced at Galt. “I believe you.” 

“1 forgot that l promised to wait, I forgot everything — until a few 
minutes ago, when Mr. Mulligan told me that you’d crashed here in 
a plane, and then 1 knew it was my fault, and if anything had hap- 
pened to you —oh God, are you all right?” 

“Yes. Don’t worry. Sit down.” 

“I don't know how one can forget one’s word of honor. I don’t 
know what happened to me.” 

“i do.” 

"Miss Taggart, 1 had been working on it for months, on that one 
particular hypothesis, and the more I worked, the more hopeless it 
seemed to become. I’d been in my laboratory for the last two days, 
trying to solve a mathematical equation that looked impossible. I 
felt Fd die at that blackboard, but wouldn’t give up. It was late at 

655 



night when he came in. I don’t think I even noticed him, not really. 
He said he wanted to speak to me and I asked him to wait and went 
nght on. I think I forgot his presence. I don't know how long he 
stood there, watching me. but what I remember is that suddenly his 
hand reached over, swept all my figures off the blackboard and wrote 
one brief equation. And then I noticed him! Then I screamed — 
because it wasn’t the full answer to the motor, but it was the way 
to it, a way l hadn’t seen, hadn’t suspected, but 1 knew where it led! 
I remember I cried, ‘How could you know it?' — and he answered, 
pointing at a photograph of your motor, Tm the man who made it 
in the first place.’ And that's the last I remember. Miss Taggart — 1 
mean, the last 1 remember of my own existence, because after that 
we talked about static electricity and the conversion of energy and 
the motor.” 

“We talked physics all the way down here,” said Galt. 

“Oh, 1 remember when you asked me whether I’d go with you,” 
said Daniels, “whether I’d be willing to go and never come back 
and give up everything . . . Everything? Give up a dead Institute 
that’s crumbling back into the jungle, give up my future as a janitor- 
slave-by-law, give up Wesley Mouch and Directive 10-289 and sub- 
animal creatures who crawl on their bellies, grunting that there is no 
mind! . . . Miss Taggart” — he laughed exultantly — “he was asking 
me whether I’d give that up to go with him\ He had to ask me twice, 
f couldn’t believe it at first, I couldn't believe that any human being 
would need to be asked or would think of it as a choice. To go? 1 
would have leaped off a skyscraper just to follow him — and to hear 
his formula before we hit the pavement’” 

”1 don't blame you,” she said; she looked at him with a tinge of 
wistfulness that was almost envy. “Besides, you’ve fulfilled your con- 
tract. You’ve led me to the secret of the motor.” 

“I’m going to be a janitor here, too,” said Daniels, grinning hap- 
pily. “Mr. Mulligan said he’d give me the job of janitor — at the power 
plant . And when I learn. I’ll rise to electrician. Isn’t he great— Midas 
Mulligan? That’s what l want to be when I reach his age. 1 want to 
make money. 1 want to make millions. I want to make as much as 
he did!” 

“Daniels!” She laughed, remembering the quiet self-control, the 
strict precision, the stern logic of the young scientist she had known. 
“What’s the matter with you? Where are you? Do you know what 
you’re saying?” 

“I’m here. Miss Taggart— and there’s no limit to what’s possible 
here! I'm going to be the greatest electrician in the world and the 
richest! I’m going to — ” 

“You’re going to go back to Mulligan’s house,” said Galt, “and 
sleep for twenty-four hours — or 1 woft’l lei you near the power 
plant.” 

“Yes, sir,” said Daniels meekly. 

The sun had trickled down the peaks fend drawn a circle of shining 
granite and glittering snow to enclose the valley — when they stepped 
out of the house. She felt suddenly as if nothing existed beyond that 
circle, and she wondered at the joyous, proud comfort to be found 

656 



in a sense of the finite, in the knowledge that the field of one's 
concern lay within the realm of one's sight. She wanted to stretch 
out her arms over the roofs of the town below, feeling that her 
fingertips would touch the peaks across. But she could not raise her 
arms; leaning on a cane with one hand and on Galt’s arm with the 
other, moving her feet by a slow, conscientious effort, she walked 
down to the car like a child learning to walk for the first time. 

She sat by Galt’s side as he drove, skirting the town, to Midas 
Mulligan’s house. It stood on a ridge, the largest house of the valley, 
the only one built two stories high, an odd combination of fortress 
and pleasure resort, with stout granite walls and broad, open ter- 
races. He stopped to let Daniels off, then drove on up a winding 
road rising slowly into the mountains. 

It was the thought of Mulligan’s wealth, the luxurious car and the 
sight of Galt’s hands on the wheel that made her wonder for the 
first time whether Galt, too, was wealthy. She glanced at his clothes: 
the gray slacks and white shirt seemed of a quality intended for long 
wear: the leather of the narrow belt about his waistline was cracked; 
the watch on his wrist was a precision instrument, but made of plain 
stainless steel. The sole suggestion of luxury was the color of his 
hair — the strands stirring m the wind like liquid gold and copper 

Abruptly, behind a turn of the road, she saw the green acres of 
pastures stretching to a distant farmhouse. There were herds of 
sheep, some horses, the fenced squares of pigpens under the sprawl- 
ing shapes of wooden barns and, failhci away, a metal hangar of a 
type that did not belong on a farm 

A man in a bright cowboy shirt was hurrying toward them. Galt 
stopped the ear and waved to him. but said nothing in answer to her 
questioning glance. He let her discover for herself, when the man 
came closer, that M was Dwight Sanders. 

“Hello. Miss Taggart,” he said, smiling. 

She looked silently at his rolled shirt sleeves, at his heavy boots, 
at the herds of cattle. “So that's all that’s left of Sanders Aircraft.” 
she said. 

“Why. no. I here’s that excellent monoplane, my best model, which 
you flattened up m the foothills." 

“Oh, you know about that? Yes. it was one of yours. U was a 
wonderful ship But I’m afraid I've damaged it pretty badly.” 

“You ought to have it fixed.” 

“1 think I’ve ripped the bottom. Nobody can fix it.” 

“I can.” 

These were the words and the tone of confidence that she had not 
heard tor years, this was the manner she had given up expecting-- 
hut the start of her smile ended in a bitter chuckle. “How?” she 
asked. “On a hog farm?” 

“Why, no. At Sanders Aircraft.” 

“Where is it?” 

“Where did you think it was? In that building in New Jersey, 
which Tinky Holloway’s cousin bought from my bankrupt successors 
by means of a government loan and a tax suspension? In that build- 

657 



ing where he produced six planes that never left th<; ground and 
eight that did, but crashed with forty passengers each?” 

‘‘Where is it, then?” 

“Wherever l am.” 

He pointed across the road. Glancing down through the tops of 
the pine trees, she saw the concrete rectangle of an airfield on the 
bottom of the valley. 

“We have a few planes here and it’s my job to take care of them,” 
he said. “I’m the hog farmer and the airfield attendant. I'm doing 
quite well at producing ham and bacon, without the men from whom 
I used to buy it But those men cannot produce airplanes without 
me — and, without me. they cannot even produce their ham and 
bacon.” 

“But you — you have not been designing airplanes, cither” 

“No, 1 haven’t. And I haven’t been manufacturing the Diesel en- 
gines 1 once promised you Since the lime 1 saw you last, I have 
designed and manufactured just one new tractor. I mean, one - 1 
tooled it by hand — no mass production was necessary. But that trac- 
tor has cut an eight-hour workday down to four hours on” — the 
straight line of his arm, extended to point across the valley, moved 
like a royal scepter: her eyes followed it and she saw the tei raced 
green of hanging gardens on a distant mountainside— “the chicken 
and dairy farm of Judge Narragansett” — his arm moved slowly to a 
long, flat stretch of greenish gold at the foot of a canyon, then to a 
band of violent green— “in the wheat fields and tobacco patch of 
Midas Mulligan” — his arm rose to a granite flank striped by glisten- 
ing tiers of leaves — “in the orchards of Richard Halley.” 

Her eyes went slowly over the curve his arm had traveled, ovei 
and over again, long after the arm had dropped: but she said only, 
“I see.” 

“Now do you believe that I can fix your plane?” he asked. 

“Yes. But have you seen it?” 

“Sure. Midas called two doctors immediately — Hendricks for you, 
and me for your plane. It can be fixed. But it will be an expensive 
job,” 

“How much?” 

“Two hundred dollars.” 

“Two hundred dollars?” she repeated incredulously: the price 
seemed much loo low. 

“In gold. Miss Taggart.” 

“Oh . . . ! Well, where can l buy the gold?” 

“You can’t.” said (Jalt. 

She jerked her head to face him defiantly. “No?” 

“No. Not where you come from. Your laws forbid it.” 

“Yours don’t?” 

“No.” 

“Then sell it to me. Choose your dwn rate of exchange. Name 
any sum you want — in my money.” 

“What money? You’re penniless, Mbs Taggart/’ 

"What?” It was a word that a Taggart heiress could not ever ex- 
pect to hear. 


658 



“You're penniless in this valley. You own millions of dollars in 
Taggart Transcontinental stock — but it will not buy one pound of 
bacon from the Sanders hog farm.” 

“I see.” 

Galt smiled and turned to Sanders. “Go ahead and fix that plane. 
Miss Taggart will pay for it eventually.” 

He pressed the starter and drove on, while she sat stiffly straight, 
asking no questions, 

A stretch of violent turquoise blue split the cliffs ahead, ending 
the road; it took her a second to realize that it was a lake. Ibe 
motionless water seemed to condense the blue of the sky and the 
green of the pine-covered mountains into so brilliantly pure a color 
that it made the sky look a dimmed pale gray. A streak of boiling 
foam came from among the pines and went crashing down the rocky 
steps to vanish in the placid water. A small granite structure stood 
by the stream. 

Galt stopped the car just as a husky man in overalls stepped out 
to the threshold of the open doorway It was Dtck McNamara, who 
had once been her best contractor. 

“Good day. Miss Taggart!” he said happily. “I’m glad to see that 
you weren’t hurt badly.” 

She inclined her head in silent greclmg — it was like a greeting to 
the loss and the pain of the past, to a desolate evening and the 
desperate face of Eddie Willers telling her the news of this man’s 
disappearance —hurt badly? she thought — 1 was, but not in the plane 
crash --on that evening, in an empty office . . Aloud, she asked. 
“What ate you doing here? What was it that you betrayed me tor, 
at the worst time possible 7 ” 

He smiled, pointing at the stone structure and down at the rocky 
drop where the tube of a water main went vanishing into the under- 
hiush. ‘Tin the utilities man.” he said. “1 take care of the water 
lines, the powei lines and the telephone service.” 

“Alone?” 

“Used to. But we’ve grown so much in the past year that I’ve had 
to hire three men to help me.” 

“What men? From where 7 ” 

“Well, one of them is a professor of economics who couldn’t get 
a job outside, because he taught that you can’t consume more than 
you have produced— one is a professor of history who couldn’t get 
a job because he taught that the inhabitants of slums were not the 
men who made this country — and one is a professor of psychology 
who couldn’t get a job because he taught that men are capable of 
thinking.” 

“They work for you as plumbers and linesmen?” 

“Yqu’J be surprised how good they are at it.” 

“And to whom have they abandoned our colleges?” 

“To those who’re wanted there.” He chuckled. “How long ago 
was it that 1 betrayed you. Miss Taggart? Not quite three years, 
wasn’t it? It’s the John Galt Line that I refused to build for you. 
Where is your Line now? But my lines have grown, in that time, 
from the couple of miles that Mulligan had built when I took over, 

659 



to hundreds of miles of pipe and wire, all within the space of this 
valley/’ 

He saw the swift, involuntary look of eagerness on her face, the 
look of a competent person’s appreciation; he smiled, glanced at her 
companion and said softly, “You know, Miss Taggart, when it comes 
to the John Galt Line — maybe it’s 1 who’ve followed it and you 
who’re betraying it.” 

She glanced at Galt. He was watching her face, but she could read 
nothing in his. 

As they drove on along the edge of the lake, she asked, “You’ve 
mapped this route deliberately, haven’t you? You’re showing me all 
the men whom” — she stopped, feeling inexplicably reluctant to say 
it, and said, instead — “whom I have lost?” 

‘Tin showing you all the men whom I have taken away from you,” 
he answered firmly. 

This was the root, she thought, of the guiltlessness of his face: he 
had guessed and named the words she had wanted to spare him. he 
had rejected a good will that was not based on his values — and in 
proud certainty of being right, he had made a boast of that which 
she had intended as an accusation. 

Ahead of them, she saw' a wooden pier projecting into the water 
of the lake. A young woman lay stretched on the sun-flooded planks, 
watching a battery of fishing rods. She glanced up at the sound of 
the car, then leaped to hci feet in a single swift movement, a shade 
too swift, and ran to the road. She wore slacks, rolled above the 
knees of her bare legs, she had dark, disheveled hair and large eyes. 
Galt waved to her. 

“Hello, John! When did you get in?” she called. 

“This morning/’ he answered, smiling and driving on. 

Dagny jerked her head to look back and saw the glance with 
which the young woman stood looking after Galt. And even though 
hopelessness, serenely accepted, was part of the worship in that 
glance, she experienced a feeling she had never known before: a stab 
of jealousy. 

“Who is that?” she asked. 

“Our best lishwife. She provides the fish for Hammond’s grocery 
market.” 

“What else is she?” 

“You’ve noticed that there’s a l what else’ for every one ot us 
here? She’s a writer. The kind of writer who wouldn’t be published 
outside. She believes that when one deals with words, one deals with 
the mind.” 

The car turned into a narrow path, climbing steeply into a wilder- 
ness of brush and pine trees. She kndw what to expect when she 
saw a handmade sign nailed to a treej with an arrow pointing the 
way: ihh bupna f.spkran/a pass 

ft was not a pass, it was a wall of laininatcd rock with a complex 
chain of pipes, pumps and valves climbing like a vine up its narrow 
ledges, but it bore, on its crest, a huge wooden sign— and the proud 
violence of the letters announcing their message to an impassable 

660 



tangle of ferns and pine branches, was more characteristic, more 
familiar than the words: wyatt oil. 

It was oil that ran in a glittering curve from the mouth of a pipe 
into a tank at the foot of the wall, as the only confession of the 
tremendous secret struggle inside the stone, as the unobtrusive pur- 
pose of all the intricate machinery— but the machinery did not re- 
semble the installations of an oil derrick, and she knew that she was 
looking at the unborn secret of the Buena Esperanza Pass, she knew 
that this was oil drawn out of shale by some method men had consid- 
ered impossible. 

Ellis Wyatt stood on a ridge, watching the glass dial of a gauge 
imbedded in the rock. He saw the car stopping below, and called, 
“Hi, Dagny! Be with you in a minute’” 

There were two other men working wilh him: a big, muscular 
roughneck, at a pump halfway up the wall, and a young boy, by the 
tank on the ground. The young boy had blond hair and a face with 
an unusual purity of lorm. She felt certain that she knew this face, 
hut she could not recall where she had seen it. The boy caught her 
puzzled glance, grinned and, as if to help her, whistled softly, almost 
inaudibly the first notes of Halley's Fifth Concerto. It was the young 
brakeman of the Comet. 

She laughed. “It was the Fifth Concerto by Richard Halley, 
wasn’t it?” 

“Sure," he answered, “But do \ou think I’d tell that to a scab?” 

“A what?" 

“What am 1 paying you tor?" asked Ellis Wyatt, approaching; the 
hoy chuckled, darting hack to seize the lever he had abandoned for 
a moment. “It’s Miss Taggart who couldn’t lire you, if you loafed 
on the job. I can." 

“That’s one of the reasons why I quit the railroad. Mtss Taggart,” 
said the boy. 

“Did you know 1 that l stole him from you’ > " said Wyatt. “He used 
to be your best brakeman and now he’s my best grease -monkey, but 
neither one of us is going to hold him permanently. " 

“Who is?” 

“Richard Halley. Music. He’s Halley's best pupil." 

She smiled. “1 know, this is a place where one employs nothing 
but aristocrats lor the lousiest kinds of jobs.” 

“They’re all aristocrats, that's true," said Wyatt, “because they 
know that there’s no such thing as a lousy job — only lousy men who 
don't care to do it." 

The roughneck was watching them from above, listening wilh curi- 
osity. She glanced up at him, he looked like a tiuck driver, so she 
asked, “What were you outside? A professor of comparative philol- 
ogy, 1 suppose?” 

“No, ma’am.” he answered. “I was a truck driver." He added, 
“But that’s not what I wanted to remain.” 

Ellis Wyatt was looking at the place around them with a kind of 
youthful pride eager for acknowledgment: it was the pride of a host 
at a formal reception in a drawing room, and the eagerness of an 

661 



artist at the opening of his show in a gallery. She smiled and asked, 
pointing at the machinery, “Shale oil?'* 

“Uh-huh” 

‘"That’s the process which you were working to develop while you 
were on earth?” She said it involuntarily and she gasped a little at 
her own words. 

He laughed. “White I was in hell- -yes. I’m on earth now ” 

“How much do you produce?” 

“Two hundred barrels a day ” 

A note of sadness came back into her voice- “It’s the process by 
which you once intended to till live tank-trains a day.” 

“Dagny.” he said earnestly, pointing at his tank, “one gallon of it 
is worth more than a traintul back there in hell — because this is 
mine , all of it, every single drop of it. to be spent on nothing but 
myself.” He raised his smudged hand, displaying the greasy stains as 
a treasure, and a black drop on the tip of his linger Hashed like a 
gem in the sun. “Mine,” he said. “Have you let them beat you into 
forgetting what that word means, what it feds like? You should give 
yourself a chance to relearn it.” 

“You’re hidden in a hole in the wilderness,” she said bleakly, “and 
you’re producing two hundred barrels of oil, when you could have 
flooded the world with it.” 

“What for? To feed the looters > ” 

“No! To earn the fortune you deserve.” 

“But I’m richer now than 1 was m the world What's wealth but 
the means of expanding one’s lite? There's two ways one can do it 
either by producing more or by producing it faster . And that's what 
I’m doing: I’m manufacturing time.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“I’m producing everything I need. I’m working to improve mv 
methods, and every hour I save is an hour added to my life. It used 
to take me five hours to till that tank. It now takes three. The two 
1 saved are mine — as price lessly mine as if I moved my grave two 
further hours away from every five I’ve got It’s two hours released 
from one task, to be invested in another— two more hours in which 
to work, to grow, to move forward. That's the savings account I’m 
hoarding. Is there any sort of safety vault that could protect this 
account in the outside world 7 ” 

“But what space do you have for moving forward? Where’s 
your market?” 

He chuckled. “Market? I now work lor use, not for profit- -my 
use, not the looters’ profit. Only those who add to my life, not those 
who devour it, are my market. Only those who produce, not those 
who consume, can ever be anybody’s Market. I deal with the life 
givers, not with the cannibals. If my oil* takes less effort to produce. 
I ask less of the men to whom I trade if for the things I need. I add 
an extra span of time to their lives with every gallon of my oil that 
they burn. And since they’re men like nie, they keep inventing faster 
ways to make the things they make— $o every one of them grams 
me an added minute, hour or day with- the bread I buy from them, 
with the clothes, the lumber, the metal” — he glanced at Galt — “an 

662 



added year with every month of electricity l purchase. That’s our 
market and that’s how it works for us- “but that was not the way it 
worked in the outer world. Down what drain were they poured out 
there, our days, our lives and our energy? Into what bottomless, 
tufureless sewer of the unpaid-for? Here, we trade achievements, not 
failures — values, not needs. We’re free of one another, yet we alt 
grow together Wealth. Dagny? What greater wealth is there than 
to own your life and to spend it on growing? Every living thing must 
grow. It can’t stand still, it must grow or perish Look — ” He pointed 
at a plant fighting upward from under the weight of a rock— a long, 
gnarled stem, contorted by an unnatural struggle, with drooping, yel- 
low remnants of unformed leaves and a single green shoot thrust 
upward to the sun with the desperation of a last, spent, inadequate 
effort. “That’s what they’re doing to us back there in hell. Do you 
see me submitting to it 7 ” 

“No.” she whispered. 

“Do you see him submitting?” He pointed at Galt. 

“God. no 1 ” 

“Then don’t be astonished by anything you see in this valley.” 

She remained silent when they diove on, Galt said nothing. 

On a distant mountainside, in the dense green of a forest, she saw 
a pine tree slanting down suddenly, tracing a curve, like the hand of 
a clock, then crashing abruptly out of sight She knew that it was a 
man-made motion 

“Who’s the lumberjack around here?” she asked. 

“ led Nielsen.” 

Die road was relaxing into wider curves and gentlei grades, among 
the softer shapes of hillsides. She saw a rust-brown slope patched by 
two squares of unmatching green: the dark, dusty green of potato 
plants, and the pale, greenish-silver of cabbages. A man in a red 
shirt w'as riding a small ti actor, cutting weeds. 

“Who’s the cabbage tycoon?” she asked. 

“Roger Marsh.” 

She dosed her eyes. She thought of the weeds that were climbing 
up the steps of a closed factory, over its lustrous tile front, a few 
hundred miles away, beyond the mountains 

The road was descending to the bottom of the valley. She saw the 
roofs of the town straight below, and the small, shining spot of the 
dollar sign in the distance at the other end. Galt stopped the car in 
front of the first structure on a ledge above the roofs, a brick building 
with a faint tinge of red trembling over its smokestack. It almost 
shocked her to see so logical a sign as “Stockton Foundry” above 
its door. 

When she walked, leaning on her cane, out of the sunlight into 
the dank gloom of the building, the shock she felt was part sense of 
anachronism, part homesickness. This was the industrial East, which 
in the last few hours, had seemed to be centuries behind her. This 
was the old, the familiar, the loved sight of reddish billows rising to 
steel rafters, of sparks shooting in sunbursts from invisible sources, 
of sudden flames streaking through a black fog, of sand molds glow- 
ing with white metal. The fog hid the walls of the structure, dissolving 

663 



its size — and for a moment, this was the great, dead foundry at Stock- 
ton, Colorado, it was Nielsen Motors ... it was Rearden Steel. 

“Hi, Dagny!” 

The smiling face that approached her out of the fog was Andrew 
Stockton’s and she saw a grimy hand extended to her with a gesture 
of confident pride, as if it held all of her moment’s vision on its palm. 

vShe clasped the hand. “Hello,” she said softly, not knowing 
whether she was greeting the past or the future. Then she shook her 
head and added, “How come you’re not planting potatoes or making 
shoes around here? You've actually remained in your own 
profession.” 

“Oh, Calvin Atwood of the Atwood Light and Power Company 
of New York City is making the shoes. Besides, my profession is 
one of the oldest and most immediately needed anywhere. Still, l 
had to fight for it. 1 had to ruin a competitor, first.” 

“What?" 

He grinned and pointed to the glass door of a sun-flooded room, 
“There's my ruined competitor,” he said. 

She saw a young man bent over a long table, working on a com- 
plex model for the mold of a drill head. He had the slender, powerful 
hands of a concert pianist and the grim lace of a surgeon concentrat- 
ing on his task. 

“He’s a sculptor,” said Stockton. “When I came here, he and his 
partner had a sort of combination hand-torge and repair shop. 1 
opened a real foundry, and took all their customers away from them. 
The boy couldn't do the kind ot job I did, it was only a part-time 
business for him. anyway — sculpture is his real business — so he came 
to work for me. He’s making more money now. in shorter hours, 
than he used to make m his own foundry. His partner was a chemist, 
so he went into agriculture and he’s produced a chemical fertilizer 
that’s doubled some of the crops around here — did you mention 
potatoes? — potatoes, in particular.” 

“Then somebody could put you out of business, too?” 

“Sure. Any time. I know one man who could and probably will, 
when he gets here. But, boy! — I’d work for him as a cinder sweeper. 
He’d blast through this valley like a rocket. He’d triple every- 
body’s production.” 

“Who’s that?” 

u Hank Rearden,” 

“Yes . . she whispered. “Oh yes!” 

She wondered what had made her say it with such immediate 
certainty. She felt, simultaneously, that Hank Rearden’s presence in 
this valley was impossible — and that this was his place, peculiarly 
his, this was the place of his youth, of jhis start, and, together, the 
place he had been seeking all his life, the land he had struggled to 
reach the goal of his tortured battle. . It seemed to her that the 
spirals of flame-tinged fog were drawing time into an odd circle — 
and while a dim thought went floating through her mind like the 
streamer of an unfollowed sentence: To hold an unchanging youth 
is to reach, at the end, the vision with which one started — she heard 
the voice of a tramp in a diner, saying, “John Galt found the fountain 

664 



of youth which he wanted to bring down to men. Only he never 
came back . . . because he found that it couldn’t be brought down.” 

A sheaf of sparks went up in the depth of the fog — and she saw 
the broad back of a foreman whose arm made the sweeping gesture 
of a signal, directing some invisible task. He jerked his head to snap 
an order — she caught a glimpse of his profile — and she caught her 
breath. Stockton saw it, chuckled and called into the fog: 

"Hey, Ken! Come here! Here’s an old friend of yours!” 

She looked at Ken Da nagger as he approached them. The great 
industrialist, whom she had tried so desperately to hold to his desk, 
was now dressed in smudged overalls. 

‘Hello, Miss Taggart. 1 told you we’d soon meet again ” 

Her head dropped, as if in assent and in greeting, but her hand 
bore down heavily upon her cane, tor a moment, while she stood 
reliving their last encounter: The tortured hour of waiting, then the 
gently distant face at the desk and the thinking ol a glass-paneled 
door closing upon a stranger. 

It was so brief a moment that two ot the men before her could 
take it only as a greeting— but it was at Galt that she looked when 
she raised her head, and she saw him looking at her as if he knew 
what she felt —she saw him seeing in her face the realization that it 
was he who had walked out of Danagger’s office, that day. His face 
gave her nothing in answer: it had lhat look of respectful severity 
with which a man stands before the fact that the truth is the truth. 

“1 didn't expect it,” she said softly, to Danagger. “I never expected 
to see you again.” 

Danagger was watching her as it she were a promising child he 
had once discovered and was now affectionately amused to watch. 
"I know,” he said. “But why are you so shocked?” 

"I . . oh, it’s just that it's preposterous!” She pointed at his 

clothes. 

“What's wrong with it?” 

"Is this, then, the end of your road 0 ” 

"Hell, no! The beginning.” 

"What are you aiming at?” 

“Mining. Not coal, though. Iron.” 

"Where?” 

He pointed toward the mountains. "Right here. Did you ever 
know Midas Mulligan to make a bad investment? You’d be surprised 
what one can find in that stretch of rock, if one knows how to look, 
lliat’s what I’ve been doing — looking,” 

"And if you don’t find any iron ore?” 

He shrugged. “There's other things to do. I’ve always been short 
on time in my life, never on what to use it for.” 

She glanced at Stockton with curiosity. "Aren't you training a man 
who could become your most dangerous competitor?” 

"That's the only sort of men I like to hire. Dagny, have you lived 
too long among the looters? Have you come to think that one man’s 
ability is a threat to another?” 

"Oh no! But I thought I was almost the only one left who didn’t 
think that,” 


665 



“Any man who’s afraid of hiring the best ability he tan find* is a 
cheat who’s in a business where he doesn’t belong. To me — the foul- 
est man on earth, more contemptible than a criminal, is the employer 
who rejects men lor being too good. That’s what I’ve always thought 
and — say, what are you laughing at?” 

She was listening to him with an eager, incredulous smile. “It’s so 
startling to hear,” she said, “because it's so right!” 

“What else can one think?” 

She chuckled softly. “You know, when l was a child, 1 expected 
every businessman to think it.” 

“And since then^” 

“Since then. I've learned not to expect it ” 

“But it's right, isn't it?” 

“I've learned not to expect the right ” 

“But it stands to reason, doesn't it?” 

“Tve given up expecting reason.” 

“That’s what one must never give up,” said Ken Danagger. 

They had returned to the car and had started down the last, de- 
scending curves of the road, when she glanced at Galt and he turned 
to her at once, as if he had expected it. 

“It was you in Danagger's office that dav. wasn’t it?” she asked. 

“Yes ” 

“Did you know, then, that l was waiting outside?” 

“Yes.” 

“Did you know what it was like, to wait behind that closed door?” 

She could not name the nature of the glance with which he looked 
at her. It was not pity, because she did not seem to be its object; it 
was the kind of glance with which one looks at suffering, but it was 
not her suffering that he seemed to be seeing. 

“Oh yes,” he answered quietly, almost lightly. 

The first shop to rise by the side of the valley’s single street was 
like the sudden sign of an open theater: a frame box without tront 
wall, its stage set in the bright colors of a musical comedy---with red 
cubes, green circles, gold triangles, which were bins of tomatoes, 
barrels of lettuce, pyramids of oranges, and a spangled backdrop 
where the sun hit shelves of rreial containers. The name on the 
marquee said; hammono iwxtky marki i. A distinguished man in 
shirt sleeves, with a stern profile and gray temples, was weighing a 
chunk of butter for an attractive young woman who stood at the 
counter, her posture light as a show girl’s, the skirt of her cotton 
dress swelling faintly in the wind, like a dance costume. Dagny smiled 
involuntarily, even though the man was Lawience Hammond. 

Tire shops were small one -story structures, and as they moved past 
her, she caught familiar names on their signs like headings on the pages 
of a book riffled by the car’s motion: ]muuj(;an general sroKk- 
a rwooo leather goods — nieisen lumber — then the sign .of the 
dollar above the door of a small brick Tact cry with the inscription; 
mulligan roBAcroo company. “Who's the Company, besides Midas 
Mulligan?” she asked: “Dr. Akston.” hfe answered. 

There were few passers-by, some men, fewer women, and they 
walked with purposeful swiftness, as if bound on specific errands, 

666 



One after another, they stopped at the sight of the car, they waved 
to Galt and they looked at hei with the unastonished curiosity of 
recognition ’‘Have I been expected here for a long time?” she asked, 
“You still are,” he answered. 

On the edge of the road, she saw a structure made of glass sheets 
held together by a wooden framework, but for one instant it seemed 
to her that it was only a frame for the painting of a woman — a tall, 
fragile woman with pale blond hair and a face of such beauty that 
it seemed veiled by distance, as it the artist had been merely able 
to suggest it, not to make it quite real. In the next instant the woman 
moved her head — and Daguy realized that there were people at the 
tables inside the structure, that it was a cafeteria, that the woman 
stood behind tire counter, and that she was Kay Ludlow, the movie 
star who, once seen, could nevei be forgotten: the star who had 
retired and vanished five years ago. to be replaced by girls of indistin- 
guishable names and interchangeable faces. But at the shock of the 
iculi/atum, Dugny thought of the sort of movies that were now being 
made — and then she ielt that the glass cafeteria was a cleaner use 
for Kay Ludlow’s beautv than a role in a picture glorifying the com- 
monplace for possessing no glory. 

The building that carne next was a small, squat block of rough 
granite, sturdy, solid, neatly built, the fines of its rectangular bulk as 
severely previse as the creases of a formal garment — but she saw, 
like an instant s ghost, the long streak of a skyscraper rising into the 
coils ot Chicago’s fog. the skyscraper that had once borne the sign 
she now saw written m gold letters above a modest pine-wood door: 
Mulligan Bank 

Galt slowed the car while moving past the hank, as if placing the 
motion in some special italics 

A small brick structure came next, bearing the sign: moi.uoan 
mini “A mint?" she asked “What’s Mulligan doing with a mint?” 
Galt reached into his pocket and dropped two small coins into the 
palm of her hand. They were miniature disks ol shining gold, smaller 
than pennies, (he kind that had not been in circulation since the days 
of Nat Taggart: they bore the head of the Statue of Liberty on one 
side, the words “United States of America — One Dollar” on the 
other, but the dates stamped upon them were of the past two years. 

“That's the money we use heie “ he said, it’s minted by Midas 
Mulligan.” 

“But . . . on whose authority?” 

“That’s stated on the com — on both sides ot it.” 

“What do you use for small change?” 

“Mulligan mints that, too, in silver. We don’t accept any other 
currency in this valley. We accept nothing but objective values.” 

She was studying the coins. “ Phis looks like . . . like something 
from the first morning in the age of my ancestors.” 

He pointed at the valley. “Yes, doesn’t it?” 

She sat looking at the two thin, delicate, almost weightless drops 
of gold in the palm of her hand, knowing that the whole of the 
Taggart Transcontinental system had rested upon them, that this had 
been the keystone supporting all the keystones, all the arches, all 

667 



the girders of the Taggart track, the Taggart Bridge, the Taggart 
Building. . . . She shook her head and slipped the coins hack into 
his hand. 

‘•You’re not making it easier for me,” she said, her voice low. 

“Pm making it as hard as possible.” 

“Why don’t you say it? Why don’.t you tell me all the things you 
want me to learn?” 

The gesture of his arm pointed at the town, at the road behind 
them. “What have I been doing?” he asked. 

They drove on in silence. After a while, she asked in the tone of a 
dryly .statistical inquiry, “How much of a fortune has Midas Mulligan 
amassed in this valley?” 

He pointed ahead. ‘ Judge for yourself.” 

The road was winding through stretches of unleveled soil toward 
the homes of the valley. The homes were not lined along a street, 
they were spread at irregular intervals over the rises and hollows of 
the ground, they were small and simple, built of local materials, 
mostly of granite and pine, with a prodigal ingenuity of thought and 
a tight economy of physical effort. Every house looked as if it had 
been put up by the labor of one man, no two houses were alike, and 
the only quality they had in common was the stamp of a mind grasp- 
ing a problem and solving it. Cialt pointed out a house, once in a 
while, choosing the names she knew — and it sounded to her like a 
list of quotations from the richest stock exchange in the world, or 
like a roll call of honor: “Ken Da nagger . . . Ted Nielsen . . Law- 

rence Hammond . . . Roger Marsh . . . Hllis Wyatt . . . Owen 
Kellogg . . . Dr. Akston.” 

The home of Dr. Akston was the last, a small cottage with a large 
terrace, lifted on the crest of a wave against the rising walls of the 
mountains, lire road went past it and climbed on into the coils of 
an ascending grade. The pavement shrank to a narrow path between 
two walls of ancient pines, their tall, straight trunks pressing against 
it like a grim colonnade, their branches meeting above, swallowing 
the path into sudden silence and twilight. There were no marks of 
wheels on the thin strip of earth, it looked unused and forgotten, a 
few minutes and a few turns seemed to take the car miles away from 
human habitation — and then the»e was nothing to break the pressure 
of the stillness but a rare wedge of sunlight cutting across the trunks 
in the depth of the forest once in a while. 

The sudden sight of a house on the edge of the path struck her 
like the shock of an unexpected sound: built in loneliness, cut off 
from all ties to human existence, it looked like the secret retreat of 
some great defiance or sorrow. It was the humblest home of the 
valley, a log cabin beaten in dark streaky by the tears of many rains, 
only its great windows withstanding the storms with the smooth, 
shining, untouched serenity of glass. I 

“Whose house is . . . Oh!” — she caught her breath and jerked her 
head away. Above the door, hit by a rhy of sun, its design blurred 
and worn, battered smooth by the windi of centuries, hung the silyer 
coat-of-arms of Sebastian d’Anconia. 

As if in deliberate answer to her involuntary movement of escape, 

668 



Galt stopped the car in front of the house. For a moment, they held 
each other’s eyes: her glance was a question, his a command, her 
face had a defiant frankness, his an unrevealing severity; she under- 
stood his purpose, but not his motive. She obeyed. Leaning on her 
cane, she stepped out of the car, then stood erect, facing the house. 

She looked at the silver crest that had come from a marble palace 
in Spain to a shack in the Andes to a log cabin in Colorado — the 
crest of the men who would not submit. The door of the cabin was 
locked, the sun did not reach into the glazed darkness beyond the 
windows, and pine branches hung outstretched above the roof like 
arms spread in protection, in compassion, in solemn blessing. With 
no sound but the snap of a twig or the ring of a drop falling some- 
where in the forest through long stretches oi moments, the silence 
seemed to hold all the pain that had been hidden here, but never 
given voice. She stood, listening with a gentle, resigned, unlamenting 
respect; Let’s see who’ll do greater honor, you — to Nat Taggart, or 
1 — to Sebastian d'Anconia. . . . Dagny! Help me to remain. To refuse. 
Even though he’s right! . . . 

She turned to look at Galt, knowing that he was the man against 
whom she had had no help to offer. He sat at the wheel of the car, 
he had not followed her or moved to assist her, as if he had wanted 
her to acknowledge the past and had respected the privacy of her 
lonely salute She noticed that he still sat as she had left him, his 
forearm leaning against the wheel at the same angle, the fingers of 
his hand hanging down in the same sculptured position. His eyes 
were watching hei, but that was all she could read in his face: that 
he had watched her intently, without moving. 

When she was seated beside him once more, he said, “That was 
the first man I took away from you." 

She asked, her face stern, open and quietly defiant, “How much 
do you know about that?" 

“Nothing that he told me in words. Everything that the tone of 
his voice told me whenever he spoke of you." 

She inclined her head. She had caught the sound of suffering in 
the faintest exaggeration of evenness in his voice. 

He pressed the starter, the motor’s explosion blasted the story 
contained in the silence, and they drove on. 

The path widened a little, streaming toward a pool of sunlight 
ahead. She saw a brief glitter of wires among the branches, as they 
drove out into a clearing. An unobtrusive little structure stood 
against a hillside, on a rising slant of rocky ground. It was a simple 
cube of granite, the size of a loolshed. it had no windows, no aper- 
tures of any kind, only a door of polished steel and a complex set 
of wire antenna branching out from the roof. Galt was driving past, 
leaving it unnoticed, when she asked with a sudden start, “What’s 
that?"" 

She saw the faint break of his smile. “The powerhouse." 

"Oh, stop, please!" 

He obeyed, backing the car to the foot of the hillside. It was her 
first few steps up the rocky incline that stopped her, as if there were 
no need to move forward, no further place to rise — and she stood 

669 



as in the moment when she had opened her eyes on ,the earth of 
the valley, a moment uniting her beginning to her goal. 

She stood looking up at the structure, her consciousness surrend- 
ered to a single sight and a single, wordless emotion— but she had 
always known that an emotion was a sura totaled by an adding ma- 
chine of the mind, and what she now felt was the instantaneous total 
of the thoughts she did not have to name, the final sum of a long 
progression, like a voice telling her by means of a feeling: If she had 
held onto Quentin Daniels, with no hope of a chance to use the 
motor, for the sole sake of knowing that achievement had not died 
on earth — if, like a weighted diver sinking in an ocean of mediocrity, 
under the pressure of men with gelatin eyes, rubber voices, spiral- 
shaped convictions, non-committal souls and non-committing hands, 
she had held, as her life line and oxygen tube, the thought of a 
superlative achievement of the human mind— if, at the sight of the 
motor’s remnant, in a sudden gasp of suffocation, as a last protest 
from his corruption-eaten lungs. Dr. Stadler had cried for something, 
not to look down at, but up to, and (fits had been the cry, the longing 
and the fuel of her life — if she had moved, drawn by the hunger of 
her youth for a sight of clean, hard, radiant competence — then here 
it was before her, reached and done, the power of an incomparable 
mind given shape in a net ot wires sparkling peacefully under a 
summer sky, drawing an incalculable power out of space into the 
secret interior of a small stone hovel. 

She thought of this structure, half the si/e of a boxcar, replacing 
the power plants of the country, the enormous conglomerations of 
steel, luel and effort — she thought of the current flowing from this 
structure, lifting ounces, pounds, tons of strain from the shoulders 
of those who would make it or use it, adding hours, days and years 
of liberated time to their lives, be it an extra moment to lift one's 
head from one’s task and glance at the sunlight, or an extra pack of 
cigarettes bought with the money saved from one’s electric bill, or 
an hour cut from the work day of every factoiy using power, or a 
month’s journey through the whole, open width of the world, on a 
ticket paid for by one day of one’s labor, on a train pulled by the 
power ot this motor — with all the energy of that weight, that strain, 
that time replaced and paid for by the energy of a single mind who 
had known how to make connections of wire follow the connections 
of his thought. But she knew that there was no meaning in motors 
or factories or trains, that their only meaning was in man’s enjoyment 
of his life, which they served — and that her swelling admiration at 
the sight of an achievement was for the man from whom it came, 
for the power and the radiant vision within him which had seen the 
earth as a place of enjoyment and hijd known that the work ot 
achieving one’s happiness was the purpose, the sanction and the 
meaning of life. l 

The door of the structure was a straight, smooth vsheet ol stainless 
steel, softly lustrous and bluish in the svjn. Above it, cut in the gran- 
ite, as the only feature of the building’* rectangular austerity, there 
stood an inscription: 

I SWEAR BY MY LIFE AND MY LOVE OF IT THAT I WILL NEVER 

670 



LIVE FOR THE SAKE OF ANOTHER MAN, NOR ASK ANOTHER MAN 
TO LIVE FOR MINE 

She turned to Galt. He stood beside her; he had followed her, she 
had known that this salute was his. She was looking at the inventor 
of the motor, but what she saw was the easy, casual figure of a 
workman in his natural setting and function — she noted the uncom- 
mon lightness of his posture, a weightless way of standing that 
showed an expert control of the use of his body — a tall body in 
simple garments: a thin shirt, light slacks, a belt about a slender 
waistline — and loose hair made to glitter like metal by the current of 
a sluggish wind. She looked at him as she had looked at his structure. 

Then she knew that the first two sentences they had said to each 
other still hung between them, filling the silence — that everything 
said since, had been said over the sound of those words, that he had 
known it, had held it. had not let her forget it. She was suddenly 
aware that they were alone; it was an awareness that stressed the 
fact, permitting no further implication, yet holding the full meaning 
oi the unnamed in that special stress They were alone in a silent 
forest, at the foot of a structure that looked like an ancient temple — 
and she knew what rite was the proper form of worship to be offered 
on an altar of that kind She telt a sudden pressure at the base of 
her throat, her head leaned back a little, no more than to feel the 
hunt shift of a current against her hair, but it was as if she were 
lying back in space, against the wind, conscious of nothing but his 
legs and the shape of his mouth. He stood watching her, his face 
still but for the taint movement of his eyelids drawing narrow as if 
against too strong a light. It was like the beat of three instants — this 
was the first — and in the next, she felt a sub of ferocious triumph 
at the knowledge that his effort and his struggle were harder to 
endure than hers~and then he moved his eyes and raised his head 
to look at the inscription on the temple 

She let him look at it for a moment, almost as an act of conde- 
scending mercy to an adversary struggling to refuel his strength, then 
she asked, with a note of imperious pride in her voice, pointing at 
the inscription. “What's that?" 

it’s the oath that was taken by every person in this valley, but 
you.” 

She said, looking at the words, “This has always been my own 
rule of living.” 

“I know it,” 

“But I don't think that yours is the wav to practice it." 

“Then you'll have to learn which one of us is w r rong.” 

She walked up to the steel door of the structure, with a sudden 
confidence faintly stressed in the movements of her body, a mere 
hint of stress, no more than her awareness of the power she held by 
means of his pain— and she tried, asking no permission, to turn the 
knob of the door. But the door was locked, and she felt no tremor 
under the pressure of her hand, as if the lock were poured and sealed 
to the stone with the solid steel of the sheet. 

“DonT try to open that door, Miss Taggart.” 

He approached her, his steps a shade too slow, as if stressing his 

671 



glitter faintly in the corners of his eyes, a humor that was shrewder, 
more demanding, yet warmer than a smile. 

He opened the door of his house, moving his arm a shade more 
slowly than normal, giving an imperceptibly solemn emphasis to his 
gesture. Walking into the living room, she faced seven men who lose 
to their leet at her entrance. 

“Gentlemen — Taggart Transcontinental," said Midas Mulligan. 

He said it smiling, but only half-jesting; sonic quality in his voice 
made the name of the railroad sound as if it would have sounded in 
the days of Nat Taggart, as a sonorous title of honor. 

She inclined her head, slowly, in acknowledgment to the men be- 
fore her, knowing that these were the men whose standards ol value 
and honor were the same as hei own, the men who recognized the 
glory of that title as she recognized it, knowing with a sudden stab 
ot wistfulness how much she had longed for that recognition through 
all her years 

Her eyes moved slowly, in greeting, from face to lace. Ellis 
Wyatt — Ken Danaggcr — Hugh Akston - Dr. Hendricks -Quentin 
Daniels — Mulligan’s voice pronounced the names of the two others: 
“Richard Halley — Judge Narragansett." 

The faint smile on Richard Halley’s face seemed to tell her that 
they had known each other foi years — as. in her lonely evenings 
by the side of her phonograph, they had. 'The austerity ol Judge 
Narragansett’s white-haired ligure reminded hei that she had once 
heard him described as a marble statue — a blindfolded marble statue, 
it was the kind of figure that had vanished from the courtrooms ot 
the country when the gold coins had vanished from the country’s 
hands. 

“You have belonged here for a long time. Miss Taggart." said 
Midas Mulligan. “This was not the way we expected you to come, 
but — welcome home." 

No! She wanted to answer, but heard herself answering soitly, 
“Thank you." 

“Dagny, how many years is it going to take you to learn to be 
yourself?" It was Ellis Wyatt, grasping her elbow, leading her to a 
chair, grinning at her look of helplessness, at the struggle between 
a smile and a tightening resistance in her face. “Don't pretend that 
you don’t understand us. You do." 

“We never make assertions. Miss Taggart x " said Hugh Akston 
“That is the moral crime peculiar to our enemies. We do not tell — 
we show. We do not claim — we prove. It is not your obedience that 
we seek to win, but your rational conviction. You have seen all the 
elements of our secret. The conclusion is now yours to draw — we 
can help you to name it, but not to accept it — the sight, the knowl- 
edge and the acceptance, must be youri" 

“I feel as if I know it," she answered jsimply, “and more: 1 feel as 
if Eve always known it, but never tounc| it, and now I’m afraid, not 
afraid to hear it, just afraid that it’s cothing so close." 

Akston smiled. “What does this look like to you. Miss Taggart?" 
He pointed around the room. 

“This?” She laughed, suddenly, looking at the faces of the men 

674 



against the golden sunburst of rays filling the great windows. 'This 
looks like . . . You know, 1 never hoped to see any of you again, I 
wondered at times how much I'd give for just one more glimpse or 
one more word — and now — now this is like that dream you imagine 
in childhood, when you think that some day, in heaven, you will see 
those great departed whom you had not seen on earth, and you 
choose, from all the past centuries, the great men you would like 
to meet.” 

“Well, that’s one clue to the nature of our secret,” said Akston. 
“Ask yourself whether the dream of heaven and greatness should 
be left waiting lor us in our graves — or whether it should be ours 
here and now and on this earth ” 

“1 know,” she whispered. 

“And if you met those great men in heaven,’' asked Ken Danag- 
ger, “what would you want to say to them?” 

“.lust . . . just ‘hello,’ I guess.” 

“That's not ail.” said Dunagger “There's something you'd want 
to hear from them. 1 didn't know it. either, until I saw him foi the 
first time” — he pointed to Galt “and he said it to me. and then I 
knew what it was that 1 had missed all my life. Miss Taggart, you’d 
want them to look at you and to say. ‘Well done.' ” She dropped 
her head and nodded silently, head down, not to let them see the 
sudden spurt of teats to her eves. “All right, then. Well done, 
Dagny! — well done- too well -and now it's time tor you to rest from 
that burden which none of us should ever have had to carry.” 

“Shut up,” said Midas Mulligan, looking at her bowed head with 
anxious concern 

But she raised her head, smiling “Thank you, ' she said to 
Danagger. 

“If you talk about resting, then let her rest,” said Mulligan. “She’s 
had loo much for one day.” 

“No.” She smiled. “Go ahead, say it- -whatever it is.” 

“Later,” said Mulligan. 

It was Mulligan and Akston who served dinner, with Quentin Dan- 
iels to help them. They served it cm small silver trays, to be placed 
on the arms of the chairs- -and they all sat about the room, with the 
fire of the skv fading in the windows and sparkles of electric light 
glittering in the wine glasses There was an air ot luxury about the 
room, but it was the luxury of expert simplicity: she noted the costly 
furniture, carefully chosen tor comfort, bought somewhere at a time 
when luxury had still been an art. There were no superfluous objects, 
but she noticed a small canvas by a great master of the Renaissance 
worth a fortune, she noticed an Oriental rug of a texture and color 
that belonged under glass in a museum. This was Mulligan’s concept 
of wealth, she thought— the wealth of selection, not of accumulation. 

Quentin Daniels sat on the floor, with his tray on his lap: he 
seemed completely at home, and he glanced up at her once in a 
while, grinning like an impudent kid brother who had beaten her to 
a secret she had not discovered. He had preceded her into the valley 
by some ten minutes, she thought, but he was one of them, while 
she was still a stranger. 


675 



Gall sat aside, beyond the circle of lamplight, on the arm of Dr. 
Afcston’s chair. He had not said a word, he had stepped back and 
turned her over to the others, and he sat watching it as a spectacle 
in which he had no further part to play. But her eyes kept coming 
back to him, drawn by the certainty that the spectacle was of his 
choice and staging, that he had set it in motion long ago, and that 
all the others knew it as she knew it. 

She noticed another person who was intensely aware of nail’s 
presence: Hugh Akston glanced up at him once in a while, involun- 
tarily, almost surreptitiously, as if struggling not to confess the loneli- 
ness of a long separation, Akston did not speak to him, as it taking 
his presence for granted. But once, when Galt bent forward and a 
strand of hair fell down across his face, Akston reached over and 
brushed it back, his hand lingering for an imperceptible instant on 
his pupil’s forehead: it was the only break of emotion he permitted 
himself, the only greeting; it was the gesture o( a father. 

She found herself talking to the men around her, relaxing in light- 
heaited comfort. No, she thought, what she felt was not strain, it 
was a dim astonishment at the strain which she should, but did not. 
feel; the abnormality of it was that* it seemed so normal and simple. 

She was barely aware of her questions, as she spoke to one man 
after another, but their answeis were printing a record in her mind, 
moving sentence by sentence to a goal. 

“The Fifth Concerto?" said Richard Halley, in answer to her ques- 
tion. “1 wrote it ten years ago. We call it the Concerto of Deliver- 
ance. Thank you for recognizing it from a few notes whistled in the 
night. . . . Yes, 1 know about that. . . . Yes, since you knew my 
work, you would know, when you heard it. that this Concerto said 
everything T had been struggling to say and reach. It’s dedicated to 
him." He pointed to Galt. “Why, no, Miss Taggart, 1 haven't given 
up music. What makes you think so? I’ve written more in the last 
ten years than in any other period of my life. I will play it for you. 
any of it, when you come to my house. . . . No, Miss Taggart, it will 
not be published outside. Not a note of it will be heard beyond 
these mountains." 

“No, Miss Taggart, l have not given up medicine," said Dr. Hen- 
dricks, in answer to her question. “1 have spent the last six years on 
research. I have discovered a method to protect the blood vessels of 
the brain from that fatal rupture which is known as a brain stroke 
It will remove from human existence the terrible threat of sudden 
paralysis. . . . No, not a word of my method will be heard outside." 

“The law. Miss Taggart?" said Judge Narragansett, “What law? I 
did not give it up-— it has ceased to exist But I am still working in 
the profession I had chosen, which was that of serving the cause of 
justice. , . . No, justice has not ceased } to exist. How could it? It is 
possible for men to abandon their sight of it, and then it is justice 
that destroys them. But it is not posable for justice to go out of 
existence, because one is an attribute cp the other, because justice is 
the act of acknowledging that which e^sts. ... Yes, I am continuing 
in my profession. I am writing a treatise on the philosophy of law, 
I shall demonstrate that humanity’s dankest evil, the most destructive 

676 



horror machine among all the devices of men, is non -objective 
law. . . . No, Miss Taggart, my treatise will not be published outside,” 

“My business, Miss Taggart?” said Midas Mulligan. “My business 
is blood transfusion — and I’m still doing it My job is to feed a life- 
fuel into the plants that are capable of growing. But ask Dr. Hen- 
dricks whether any amount of blood will save a body that refuses to 
function, a rotten hulk that expects to exist without effort. My blood 
bank is gold. Gold is a fuel that will perform wonders, but no fuel 
can work where there is no motor. . . . No, l haven't given up. I 
merely got fed up with the job of running a slaughter house, where 
one drams blood out of healthy living beings and pumps it into 
gutless half-corpses.” 

“Given up?" said Hugh Akston. “Check your premises. Miss Tag- 
gart. None of us has given up. It is the world that has. . . . What is 
wrong with a philosopher running a roadside diner? Or a cigarette 
factory, as I am doing now? Alt work is an act of philosophy. And 
when men will learn to consider productive work— and that which 
is its source — as the standard of their moral values, they will reach 
that state of perfection which is the birthright they lost. . . . Hie 
source of work? Man’s mind. Miss Taggart, man’s reasoning mind. 

I am vvriting a book on this subject, defining a moral philosophy that 
I learned from my own pupil. . . Yes, it could save the world. , . . 

No, it will not be published outside.” 

“Why 0 ” she cried “Why° What are you doing, all of you?” 

“We are on strike.” said John Galt 

They all turned to him, as if they had been waiting for his voice 
and tor that word. She heard the empty beat of time within her, 
which was the sudden silence of the room, as she looked at him 
across a span of lamplight. He sat slouched casually on the arm of 
a chair, leaning forward, his forearm across his knees, his hand hang- 
ing down idly— and it was the faint smile on his face that gave to 
his words the deadly sound of the irrevocable* 

“Why should this seem so staitling? There is only one kind of 
men who ha\e never been on strike in human history Every other 
kind am! class have stopped, when they so wished, and have pre- 
sented demands to the world, claiming to be indispensable— except 
the men who have carried the world on their shoulders, have kept 
it alive, have endured torture as sole payment, but have never walked 
out on the human race Well, their turn has come. Let the world 
discover who they aie, what they do and what happens when they 
refuse to function. This is the strike of the men of the mind. Miss 
Taggart. This is the mind on strike.” 

She did not move, except for the fingers of one hand that moved 
slowly up her check to her temple. 

“Through all the ages,” he said, “the mind has been regarded as 
evil, and every form of insult: from heretic to materialist to ex- 
ploiter- every form of iniquity: from exile to disfranchisement to 
expropriation — every form of torture: from sneers to rack to firing 
squad — have been brought down upon those who assumed the re- 
sponsibility of looking at the world through the eyes of a living 
consciousness and performing the crucial act of a rational connection. 

677 



Yet only to the extent to which— in chains, in dungeons, in hidden 
comers, in the cells of philosophers, in the shops of traders — some 
men continued to think, only to that extent was humanity able to 
survive. Through all the centuries of the worship of the mindless, 
whatever stagnation humanity chose to endure, whatever brutality 
to practice— it was only by th£ grace of the men who perceived that 
wheat must have water in order to grow, that stones laid in a curve 
will form an arch, that two and two makes four, that love is not 
served by torture and life is not fed by destruction — only by the 
grace of those men did the rest of them learn to experience moments 
when they caught the spark of being human, and only the sum of 
such moments permitted them to continue to exist. It was the man 
of the mind who taught them to bake their bread, to heal their 
wounds, to forge their weapons and to build the jails into which they 
threw him. He was the man of extravagant energy — and reckless 
generosity — who knew that stagnation is not man’s fate, that impo- 
tence is not his nature, that the ingenuity of his mind is his noblest 
and most joyous power — and in service to that love of existence he 
was alone to feel, he went on working, working at any price, working 
for his despoilers, for his jailers, for his torturers, paying with his hie 
for the privilege of saving theirs. This was his glory and his guilt — 
that he let them teach him to feel guilty of his glory, to accept the 
part of a sacrificial animal and, in punishment for the sin of intelli- 
gence, to perish on the altars of the brutes. The tragic joke of human 
history is that on any of the altars men erected, it was always man 
whom they immolated and the animal whom they enshrined. It was 
always the animal’s attributes, not man’s, that humanity worshipped: 
the idol of instinct and the idol of force— the mystics and the kings — 
the mystics, who longed for an irresponsible consciousness and ruled 
by means of the claim that their dark emotions were superior to 
reason, that knowledge came in blind, causeless tits, blindly to be 
followed, not doubted — and the kings, who ruled by means of claws 
and muscles, with conquest as their method and looting as their aim, 
with a dub or a gun as sole sanction of their power. The defenders 
of man’s soul were concerned will) his feelings, and the defenders 
of man’s body were concerned with his stomach — but both weie 
united against his mind. Yet no one, not the lowest of humans, is 
ever able fully to renounce his brain No one has ever believed in 
the irrational; what they do believe in is the unjust. Whenever a man 
denounces the mind, it is because his goal is of a nature the mind 
would not permit him to confess. When he preaches contradictions, 
he does so in the knowledge that someone will accept the burden 
of the impossible, someone will make it work for him at the price 
of his own suffering or life; destruction?^ the price of any contradic- 
tion. It is the victims who made injustice possible. It is the men of 
reason who made it possible for the rule of the brute to work. The 
despoiling of reason has been the motive of every anti-reasoft creed 
on earth. The despoiling of ability ha& been the purpose of every 
creed that preached self-sacrifice. The $espoilers have always known 
it. Wc haven’t. The time has come fot us to see. What we are now 
asked to worship, what had once been dressed as God or king, is 

678 



the naked, twisted, mindless figure of the human Incompetent. This 
is the new ideal, the goal to aim at, the purpose to live for, and all 
men are to be rewarded according to how close they approach it. 
This is the age of the common man, they tell us — a title which any 
man may claim to the extent of such distinction as he has managed 
not to achieve. He will rise to a rank of nobility by means of the 
effort he has failed to make, he will be honored for such virtue as 
he has not displayed, and he will be paid for the goods which he 
did not produce. But we — we, who must atone tor the guilt of abil- 
ity — we will work to support him as he orders, with his pleasure as 
our only reward. Since we have the most to contribute, we will have 
the least to say. Since we have the better capacity to think, we will 
not be permitted a thought of our own. Since we have the judgment 
to act, we will not be permitted an action of our choice. We will work 
under directives and controls, issued by those who are incapable of 
working. They will dispose of our energy, because they have none 
to offer, and of our product, because they can’t produce. Do you 
say that this is impossible, that it cannot be made to work? They 
know it, but it is you who don’t— and they are counting on you not 
to know it They are counting on you to go on. to work to the limit 
of the inhuman and to feed them while you last —and when you 
collapse, there will be another victim starting out and feeding them, 
while struggling to survive — and the span of each succeeding victim 
will be shorter, and while you'll die to leave them a railroad, your 
last descendant -in-spirit will die to leave them a loaf of bread. This 
does not worry the looters of the moment. Their plan — like all the 
plans of all the royal looters of the past — is only that the loot shall 
last their lifetime. It has always lasted before, because m one genera- 
tion they could not run out of victims. But this time — it will not last 
The victims are on strike. We are on strike against maityrdom — and 
against the moral code that demands it. We are on strike against 
those who believe that one man must exist for the sake of another. 
We are on strike against the morality of cannibals, be it practiced 
in body or in spirit. We will not deal with men on any terms but 
ours -and our terms are a moral code which holds that man is an 
end in himself and not the means to any end of others. We do not 
seek to force our code upon them. They are free to believe what 
they please. But, lor once, they will have to believe it and to exist — 
without our help. And, once and for all, they will learn the meaning 
of their creed. T hat creed has lasted for centuries solely by the sanc- 
tion of the victims — by means of the victims’ acceptance of punish- 
ment for breaking a code impossible to practice. But that code was 
intended to be broken. It is a code that thrives not on those who 
observe it, but on those who don’t, a morality kept m existence not 
by virtue of its saints, but by the grace of its sinners. We have de- 
cided not to be sinners any longer. We have ceased breaking that 
moral code. We shall blast it out of existence forever by the one 
method that it can’t withstand: by obeying it. We are obeying it. We 
arc complying. In dealing with our fellow men, we are observing 
their code of values to the letter and sparing them all the evils they 
denounce. The mind is evil? We have withdrawn the works of our 

679 



minds from society, and not a single idea of ours is to be known or 
used by men. Ability is a selfish evil that leaves no chance to those 
who are less able? We have withdrawn from the competition and 
left all chances open to incompetents. The pursuit of wealth is greed, 
the root of all evil? We do not seek to make fortunes any longer. It 
is evil to cam more than one’s bare sustenance? We take nothing 
but the lowliest jobs and we produce, by the effort of our muscles, 
no more than we consume for our immediate needs — with not a 
penny nor an inventive thought left over to harm the world. It is 
evil to succeed, since success is made by the strong at the expense 
of the weak? We have ceased burdening the weak with our ambition 
and have left them free to prosper without us. It is evil to be an 
employer? We have no employment to offer. It is evil to own prop- 
erty? We own nothing. It is evil to enjoy one’s existence m this 
world? There is no form of enjoyment that we seek from their world, 
and — this was hardest tor us to attain — what we now feel for their 
world is that emotion which they preach as an ideal: Indifference — 
the blank — the zero— the mark ot death. . . . We are giving men 
everything they’ve professed to want and to seek as virtue for centu 
ties. Now let them see whether they want it.” 

“It was you who started this strike?” she asked. 

“I did.” 

He got up, he stood, hands in pockets, his lace in the light --and 
she saw him smile with the easy, eifortless, implacable amusement 
of certainty. 

“We’ve heard so much about strikes,” he said, “and about the 
dependence of the uncommon man upon the common. We’ve heard 
it shouted that the industrialist is a parasite, that his workers support 
him, create his wealth, make his luxury possible — and what would 
happen to him if they walked out? Veiy well 1 propose to show to 
the world who depends on whom, who supports whom, who is the 
source of wealth, who makes whose livelihood possible and what 
happens to whom when who walks out.” 

The windows were now sheets of darkness, reflecting the dots ol 
lighted cigarettes. He picked a cigarette fiom a table beside him, 
and in the flare ol a match she saw the brief sparkle of gold, the 
dollar sign, between his fingers. 

“1 quit and joined him and went on strike,” said Hugh Akston, 
“because I could not share my profession with men who claim that 
qualification of an intellectual consists of denying the existence ot 
the intellect. People would not employ a plumber who’d attempt to 
prove his professional excellence by asserting that there’s no such 
thing as plumbing-- but, apparently, t{ie same standards of caution 
are not considered necessary in regard to philosophers. 1 learned 
from my own pupil, however, that it was l who made this possible. 
When thinkers accept those who deny the existence of thinking, as 
fellow thinkers of a different school of thought — it is they who 
achieve the destruction of the mind. They grant the enemy’s basic 
premise, thus granting the sanction of Reason to formal dementia. A 
basic premise is an absolute that pet|mits no co-operation with its 
antithesis and tolerates no tolerance. Jn the same manner and for 

680 



the same reason as a banker may not accept and pass counterfeit 
money, granting it the sanction, honor and prestige of his bank, just 
as he may not grant the counterfeiter’s demand for tolerance of a 
mere difference of opinion — so 1 may not grant the title of philoso- 
pher to Dr. Simon Pritchett or compete with him for the minds of 
men. Dr. Pritchett has nothing to deposit to the account of phiioso* 
phy, except his declared intention to destroy it. He seeks to cash 
in- by means of denying it— on the power of reason among men. 
He seeks to stamp the mint-mark of reason upon the plans of his 
looting masters. He seeks to use the prestige of philosophy to pur- 
chase the enslavement of thought. But that prestige is an account 
which can exist only so long as 1 am there to sign the checks. Let 
him do it without me. Let him — and those who entrust to him their 
children’s minds— have exactly that which they demand: a world of 
intellectuals without intellect and of thinkers who proclaim that they 
cannot think. I am conceding it. I am complying. And when they see 
the absolute reality of their non-absolute world, 1 will not be there 
and it will not be 1 who will pay the price of their contradictions.” 

“Dr. Akston quit on the principle of sound banking,” said Midas 
Mulligan. ‘1 quit on the principle of love. Love is the ultimate form 
of recognition one grants to superlative values. It was the Hunsacker 
case that made me quit - that case when a court of law ordered that 
1 honor, as first right to my depositors’ tunds, the demand of those 
who would offer proof that they had no right to demand it. 1 was 
ordered to hand out money earned by men, to a worthless rotter 
whose only claim consisted of his inability to earn it. 1 was born on 
a farm. I knew the meaning of money, i had dealt with many men 
in my life. I had watched them grow, t had made my fortune by 
being able to spot a certain kind of man. The kind who never asked 
you for faith, hope and charity, but offered you facts, proof and 
profit. Did you know that l invested in Hank Reardeifs business at 
the time when he was rising, when he had just beaten his way out 
of Minnesota to buy the steel mills in Pennsylvania? Well, when 1 
looked at that court order on my desk, 1 had a vision. 1 saw a picture, 
and I saw it so dearly that it changed the looks of everything tor 
me. I saw the bnght face and the eyes of young Rearden, as he’d 
been when Pd met him first. 1 saw him lying at the foot of an altar, 
with his blood running down into the earth - and what stood on that 
altar was Lee Hunsacker, with the mucus-filled eyes, whining that 
he’d never had a chance. . . . IPs strange how simple things become, 
once you see them clearly. It wasn’t hard for me to dose the bank 
and go: I kept seeing, for the first time in my life, what it was that 
I had lived for and loved.” 

She looked at Judge Narragansett. “You quit over the same case, 
didn’t you?” 

“Yes,” said Judge Narragansett “1 quit when the court of appeals 
reversed my ruling. The purpose for which 1 had chosen my work, 
was my resolve to be a guardian of justice. But the laws they asked 
me to enforce made me the executor of the vilest injustice conceiv- 
able. I was asked to use force to violate the rights of disarmed men, 
who came before me to seek my protection for their rights. Litigants 

681 



obey the verdict of a tribunal solely on the premise that there is an 
objective rule of conduct, which they both accept. Now I saw that 
one man was to be bound by it, but the other was not, one was to 
obey a rule, the other was to assert an arbitrary wish— his need — 
and the law was to stand on the side of the wish. Justice was to 
consist of upholding the unjustifiable. I quit — because I could not 
have borne to hear the words Your Honor’ addressed to me by an 
honest man.” 

Her eyes moved slowly to Richard Halley, as if she were both 
pleading and afraid to hear his story. He smiled. 

“I would have forgiven men for my struggle,” said Richard Halley. 
*it was their view of my success that I could not forgive. I had felt 
no hatred in all the years when they rejected me. If my work was 
new, 1 had to give them time to learn, if I took pride in being first 
to break a trail to a height of my own, 1 had no right to complain 
if others were slow to follow. That was what I had told myself 
through all those years — except on some nights, when 1 could neither 
wait nor believe any longer, when I cried ‘why?’ but found no an- 
swer. Then, on the night when they chose to cheer me, l stood before 
them on the stage of a theater, thinking that this was the moment I 
had struggled to reach, wishing to feel it, but feeling nothing. 1 was 
seeing all the other nights behind me, hearing the ‘why?' which still 
had no answer— and their cheers seemed as empty as their snubs. It 
they had said, ‘Sorry to be so late, thank you for waiting’ — 1 would 
have asked for nothing else and they could have had anything I had 
to give them. But what l saw in their taces, and in the way they 
spoke when they crowded to praise me. was the thing 1 had heard 
being preached to artists — only I had never believed that anyone 
human could mean it. They seemed to say that they owed me noth- 
ing, that their deafness had provided me with a moral goal, that it 
had been my duty to struggle, to sutler, to bear— tor their sake-- 
whatever sneers, contempt, injustice, torture (hey chose to inflict 
upon me. to bear it in order to teach them to enjoy my work, that 
this was their rightful due and my proper purpose And then I under- 
stood the nature of the looter-in-spirit, a thing I had never been able 
to conceive. I saw them reaching into my soul, just as they reached 
into Mulligan’s pocket, reaching to expropriate the value of my per- 
son, just as they reach to expropriate his wealth — I saw the imperti- 
nent malice of mediocrity boastfully holding up its own emptiness 
as an abyss to be filled by the bodies of its betters — I saw them 
seeking, just as they seek to feed on Mulligan’s money, to feed on 
those hours when I wrote my music and on that which made me 
write it, seeking to gnaw their way to self-esteem by extorting from 
me the admission that they were thd goal of my music, so that pre- 
cisely by reason of my achievement, it would not be they who’d 
acknowledge my value, but I who vfould bow to theirs. .... It was 
that night that I took the oath nevef to let them hear another note 
of mine. The streets were empty whfen I left that theater. I was the 
last one to leave—and I saw a man whom l had never seen before, 
waiting for me in the light of a lamppost. He did not have to tell 

682 



me much. But the concerto I dedicated to him is called the Concerto 
of Deliverance.” 

She looked at the others. “Please tell me your reasons,” she said, 
with a faint stress of firmness in her voice, as if she were taking a 
beating, but wished to take it to the end. 

T quit when medicine was placed under State control, some years 
ago,” said Dr. Hendricks. “Do you know what it takes to perform 
a brain operation? Do you know the kind of skill it demands, and 
the years of passionate, merciless, excruciating devotion that go to 
acquire that skill? That was what 1 would not place at the disposal 
of men whose sole qualilication to rule me was their capacity to spout 
the lraudulent generalities that got them elected to the privilege of 
enforcing their wishes at the point of a gun. I would not let them 
dictate the purpose for which my years of study had been spent, or 
the conditions of my work, or my choice of patients, or the amount 
of my reward. 1 observed that in all the discussions that preceded 
the enslavement of medicine, men discussed everything — except the 
desires of the doctors. Men considered only the "welfare' of the pa- 
tients, with no thought for those who were to provide it. That a 
doctor should have any right, desire or choice in the matter, was 
regarded as irrelevant selfishness; his is not to choose, they said, only 
to serve/ ITiat a man who’s willing to work under compulsion is 
too dangerous a brute to entrust with a job in the stockyards — never 
occurred to those who ptoposed to help the sick by making life 
impossible for the healthy. 1 have often wondered at the smugness 
with which people asserl their right to enslave me, to control my 
work, to force my will, to violate my conscience, to stifle my mind — 
yet what is it that they expect to depend on, when they lie on an 
operating table under my hands? Their moral code has taught them 
Jo believe that it is safe to rely on the virtue of their victims. Well, 
that is the virtue I have withdrawn. Let them discover the kind of 
doctors that their system will now produce. Let them discover, in 
their operating rooms and hospital wards, that it is not safe to place 
their lives in the hands of a man whose life they have throttled. It 
is not safe, if he is the sort of man who resents it — and still less safe, 
if he is the sort who doesn’t.” 

“I quit,” said Ellis Wyatt, “because 1 didn't wish to serve as the 
cannibals' meal and to do the cooking, besides/’ 

”1 discovered,” said Ken Danagger, “that the men I was fighting 
were impotent The shiftless, the purposeless, the irresponsible, the 
irrational- it was not I who needed them, it was not theirs to dictate 
icrms to me, it was not mine to obey demands. I quit, to let them 
discover it, UK)/’ 

T quit,” said Quentin Daniels, “because, if there are degrees of 
damnation, the scientist who places his mind in the service of brute 
force is the longest- range murderer on earth/’ 

lhey were silent. She turned to Galt. “And you?” she asked. “You 
wore first. What made you come to it?” 

He chuckled. “My refusal to be bom with any original sin,” 

“What do you mean?” 

“I have never felt guilty of my ability. 1 have never felt guilty of 

683 



my mind. I have never felt guilty of being a man, I accepted no 
unearned guilt, and thus was free to earn and lo know my own value. 
Ever since I can remember, I had felt that I would kill the man who’d 
claim that I exist for the sake of his need — and I had known that this 
was the highest moral feeling. That night, at the Twentieth Century 
meeting, when 1 heard an unspeakable evil being spoken in a tone of 
moral righteousness, 1 saw the root of the world's tragedy, the key to 
it and the solution. I saw what had to be done. I went out to do it.” 

"And the motor?” she asked. "Why did you abandon it? Why did 
you leave it to the Starnes heirs?” 

"It was their father's property. He paid me for it. It was made on 
his time. But I knew that it would be of no benefit to them and that 
no one would ever hear of it again. It was my first experimental 
model. Nobody but me or my equivalent could have been able to 
complete it or even to grasp what it was. And I knew that no equiva- 
lent of mine would come near that factory from then on.” 

"You knew the kind of achievement vour motor represented?” 

"Yes.” 

"And you knew you were leaving it lo perish?” 

"Yes.” He looked off into the darkness beyond the windows and 
chuckled softly, but it was not a sound of amusement ”1 looked at 
my motor for the last time, before I left. I thought of the men who 
claim that wealth is a matter of natuial resources- and of the men 
who claim that wealth is a matter of ser/mg the factories— and of the 
men who claim that machines condition their brains. Well, there was 
the motor to condition them, and there it remained as just exactly 
what it is without man’s mind— as a pile of metal scraps and wires, 
going to rust. You have been thinking of the great service which that 
motor could have rendered to mankind, if it had been put into produc- 
tion. I think that on the day when men understand the meaning of its 
fate in that factory's junk heap — it will have rendered a greater one ” 

"Did you expect to sec that dav, when you left it?” 

"No.” 

"Did you expect a chance to rebuild it elsewhere 7 ” 

"No.” 

"And you were willing to let it lernam in a junk heap k> ” 

"For the sake of what that motor meant to me.” he said slowly, "1 
had to be willing to let it crumble and vanish forever” — he looked 
straight at her and she heard the steady, unhesilanl. unintlected ruth- 
lessness ol his voice — "just as you will have to be willing to let the 
rail of T aggart Transcontinental crumble and vanish.” 

She held his eyes, her head was lifted, and she said softly, in the 
tone of a proudly open plea. "Don't make me answer you now.” 

"1 won’t. We'll tell you whatever yoiu wish to know. We won’t urge 
you to make a decision.” He added^ and she was shocked by the 
sudden gentleness of his voice, "1 said that that kind of indifference 
toward a world which should have bfcen ours was the hardest thing 
to attain, l know. We've all gone through it.” 

She looked at the quiet, impregnable room, and at the light— the 
light that came from his motor— on the faces of men who were the 
most serene and confident gathering She had ever attended. 

684 



“‘What did you do, when you walked out of the Twentieth Cen- 
tury?” she asked. 

“I went out to become a llame-spotter. I made it my job to watch 
lor those bright flares in the growing night of savagery, which were 
the men of ability, the men of the mind— to watch their course, their 
struggle and their agony— and to pull them out, when I knew that 
they had seen enough.” 

“What did you tell them to make them abandon everything?” 

“I told them that they were light.” 

In answer to the silent question of her glance, he added, “I gave 
them the pride they did not know they had. I gave them the words 
to identify i(. 1 gave them that priceless possession which they had 
missed, had longed for, yet had not known they needed: a moral 
sanction. Did you call me the destroyer and the hunter of men? 1 was 
the walking delegate of this strike, the leader of the victims’ rebellion, 
the defender oi the oppressed, the disinherited, the exploited — and 
when / use these words, they have, for once, a literal meaning.” 

“Who were the first to follow you?” 

He let a moment pass, in deliberate emphasis, then answered, “My 
two best friends. You know one of them. You know, perhaps better 
than anyone else, what price he paid for it. Our own teacher. Dr. 
Akston, was next. He joined us within one evening’s conversation. 
William Hastings, who had been my boss in the research laboratory 
ot Twentieth Century Motors, had a hard time, fighting it out with 
himself. It took him a year But he joined. Then Richard Halley. Then 
Midas Mulligan.” 

“ — who took fifteen minutes,” said Mulligan. 

She turned to him “it was you who established this valley?” 

“Yes,” said Mulligan. “It was just my own private retreat, at first. 

1 bought it years ago, l bought miles of these mountains, section by 
section, from ranchers and cattlemen who didn’t know what they 
owned. The valley is not listed on any map l built this house, when 
1 decided to quit. I cut off all possible avenues of approach, except 
one road— and it’s camouflaged beyond anyone's power to discover — 
and I stocked this place to be self-supporting, so that 1 could live here 
for the rest of my life and never have to see the face of a looter. 
When I heard that John had got Judge Narragansett, too, I invited 
ihc Judge to come here. Then we asked Richard Halley to join us. 
The others remained outside, at first.” 

“We had no rules of any kind.” said Galt, “except one. When a 
man look our oath, it meant a single commitment: not to work in his 
own profession, not to give to the world the benefit of his mind. Each 
of us carried it out in any manner he chose. Those who had money, 
retired to live on their savings. Those who had to work, took the 
lowest jobs they could find. Some of us had been famous; others — 
like that young brakeman of yours, whom Halley discovered — were 
stopped by us before they had set out to get tortured. But we did not 
give up our minds or the work we loved. Each of us continued in his 
real profession, in whatever manner and spare time he could man- 
age — but he did it secretly, for his own sole benefit, giving nothing to 
men, sharing nothing. We were scattered all over the country, as the 

685 



outcasts we had always been, only now we accepted our parts with 
conscious intention. Our sole relict were the rare occasions when we 
could see one another. We found that we liked to meet- -in order to 
be reminded that human beings still existed. So we came to set aside 
one month a year to spend m this valley— to rest, to live in a rational 
world, to bring our real work out ot hiding, to trade our achieve- 
ments — here, where achievements meant payment, not expropriation. 
Each of us built his own house here, at his own expense — for one 
month of life out of twelve. It made the eleven easier to bear. 1 * 

“You see. Miss Taggart,” said Hugh Akston, “man is a social being, 
but not in the way the looters preach.” 

“It's the destruction of Colorado that started the growth of this 
valley,” said Midas Mulligan. “Ellis Wyatt and the others came to live 
here permanently, because they had to hide Whatever part of their 
wealth they could salvage, they converted into gold or machines, as 1 
had, and they brought it here There were enough of us to develop 
the place and to create jobs for those who had had to earn their living 
outside. We have now reached the stage wheie most of us can live 
here full time. The valley is almost self-supporting— and as to the 
goods that we can’t yet produce, I purchase them from the outside 
through a pipe line of my own. It's a special agent, a man who does 
not let my money reach the looters. We are not a state here, not a 
society of any kind— we're just a voluntary association ot men held 
together by nothing but every man's self-interest. I own the valley 
and I sell the land to the olhers, when they want it Judge Narragansett 
is to act as our arbiter, in case o! disagreements. He hasn't had to be 
called upon, as yet. They say that it’s hard for men to agree. You'd 
be surprised how easy it is — when both parties hold as their moral 
absolute that neither exists for the sake of the other and that reason 
is their only means of trade. The time is approaching when all of us 
will have to be called to live here— because the world is falling apart 
so fast that it will soon be starving. But we will be able to support 
ourselves in this valley.” 

“The world is crashing faster than we expected,*’ said Hugh Akston. 
“Men are stopping and giving up. Your frozen trains, the gangs of 
raiders, the deserters, they’re men who’vc never heard of us. and 
they’re not part of our strike, they are acting on their own — it's the 
natural response of whatever rationality is still left in them — it's the 
same kind of protest as ours.” 

“We started with no time limit in view,” said Galt. “We did not 
know whether we’d live to see the liberation of the world or whethei 
we’d have to leave our battle and our secret to the next generations. 
We knew only that this was the only way we cared to live. But now we 
think that we will sec, and soon, the; day of our victory and of our 
return.” 

“When?” she whispered. 

“When the code of the looters has?collapsed.” 

He saw her looking at him, her gtarfee half-question, half-hope, and 
he added, “When the creed of sclf-irfcmolation has run, for once, its 
undisguised course — when men find no victims ready to obstruct the 
path of justice and to deflect the fall* of retribution on themselves— 

686 



when the preachers of self-sacrifice discover that those who are willing 
to practice it, have nothing to sacrifice, and those who have, are not 
willing any longer— when men see that neither their hearts nor their 
muscles can save them, but the mind they damned is not there to 
answer their screams for help — when they collapse as they must, as 
men without minds — when they have no pretense of authority left, no 
lemnant of law, no trace of morality, no hope, no food and no way 
to obtain it -when they collapse and the road is clear — then we’ll 
come back to rebuild the world.” 

The Taggart Terminal, she thought; she heard the words beating 
through the numbness of her mind, as the sum of a burden she had 
not had time to weigh. This was the Taggart Terminal, she thought, 
this room, not the giant concourse in New York — tins was her goal, 
the end of track, the point beyond the curve ol the earth where the 
two straight lines of rail met and vanished, drawing her forward — as 
they had drawn Nathaniel Taggart- -this was the goal Nathaniel Tag- 
gart had seen in the distance and this was the point still holding the 
straight-line glance ol his lifted head above the spiral motion of men 
in the granite concourse. It was tor the sake of this that she had 
dedicated herself to the rail of Taggart Transcontinental, as to the 
body of a spirit yet to be found. .She had found it, everything she had 
cvet wanted, it was here in this room, reached and hers — but the price 
\\ as the net of rail behind hei, the rati that would vanish, the bridge 
that would crumble, the signal lights that would go out. . . . And 
yet . F very thing. I had ever wanted, she thought — looking away 
iiom the figure of a man with sun -colored hair and implacable eyes. 

‘You don’t have to answer us now.” 

She raised her head; he was watching her as if he had lollowed the 
steps in her mind. 

“We never demand agreement,” he said. ‘ We never tell anyone 
more than he is ready to hear. You are the first person who has 
learned out secret ahead of time. But you're here and you had to 
Know. Now you know the exact nature of the choice you'll have to 
make If it seems hard, it’s because you still think that it does not 
have to be one or the other. You will learn that it does.” 

"Will you give me time?” 

“Your time is not ours to give. Take your time. You alone can 
decide what you’ll choose to do, and when. We know the cost of that 
decision We’ve paid it. That you’ve come here might now make it 
easier for you— or harder.” 

“Harder,” she whispered. 

“I know.” 

He said it, his voice as low as hers, with the same sound of being 
forced past one’s breath, and she missed an instant of time, as the 
stillness after a blow, because she felt that this— not the moments 
when he had earned her in his arms down the mountainside, but 
this meeting of their voices — had been the closest physical contact 
between them. 

A full moon stood in the sky above the valley, when they drove 
back to his house; it stood like a fiat, round lantern without rays, with 
a haze of light hanging in space, not reaching the ground, and the 

687 



illumination seemed to come from the abnormal white brightness of 
the soil. In the unnatural stillness of sight without color, the earth 
seemed veiled by a film of distance, its shapes did not merge into a 
landscape, but went slowly flowing past, like the print of a photograph 
on a cloud. She noticed suddenly that she was smiling. She was looking 
down at the houses of the valley. Their lighted windows were dimmed 
by a bluish cast, the outlines of their walls were dissolving, long hands 
of mist were coiling among them in torpid, unhurried waves. It looked 
Tike a city sinking under water. 

“What do they call this place?” she asked. 

“I call it Mulligan’s Valley,” he said. “The others call it Galt’s 
Gulch.” 

“I’d call it-—” but she did not finish. 

He glanced at her. She knew' what he saw in her face. He turned 
away. 

She saw a faint movement of his lips, like the release of a breath 
that he was forcing to function. She dropped her glance, her arm 
falling against the side of the car, as if her hand were suddenly too 
heavy for the weakness in the crook of her elbow. 

The road grew darker, as it went higher, and pine branches met 
over their heads. Above a slant ol rock moving to meet them, she 
saw the moonlight on the windows of his house. Her head tell back 
against the seat and she lay still, losing awareness of the car, feeling 
only the motion that carried her forward, watching the glittering drops 
of water in the pine branches, which were the stars. 

When the car stopped, she did not permit herself to know why she 
did not look at him as she stepped out. She did not know that she 
stood still for an instant, looking up at the dark windows. She did not 
hear him approach; but she fell the impact of his hands with shocking 
intensity, as if it were the only awareness she could now experience 
He lifted her in his arms and started slowly up the path to the house 

He walked, not looking at her, holding her tight, as if trying to hold 
a progression of time, as if his arms were still locked over the moment 
when he had lifted her against his chest. She fell his steps as if they 
were a single span of motion to a goal and as if each step were a 
separate moment in which she dared not think of the next Her head 
was dose to his, his hair brushing her cheek, and she knew that neither 
of them would move his lace that one breath closer. It was a sudden, 
stunned state of quiet drunkenness, complete in itself, their hair min- 
gled like the rays of two bodies in space that had achieved their 
meeting, she saw that he walked witty his eyes closed, as if even sight 
would now be an intrusion. > 

He entered the house, and as he hfioved across the living room, lie 
did not look to his left and neither pid she, but she knew that both 
of them were seeing the door on hisjleft that led to his bedroom. He 
walked the length of the darkness to-the wedge of moonlight that fell 
across the guest-room bed, he placed her down upon it, she felt an 
instant’s pause of his hands still holding her shoulder and waistline, 
and when his hands left her body, she knew that the moment was over 

He stepped back and pressed a switch, surrendering the room m 

688 



the harshly public glare of light. He stood still, as if demanding that 
she look at him, his face expectant and stem. 

‘Have you forgotten that you wanted to shoot me on sight?” he 
asked. 

It was the unprotected stillness of his figure that made it real. The 
shudder that threw her upright was like a cry of terror and denial; 
but she held his glance and answered evenly, “That’s true. I did.” 

“Then stand by it,” 

Her voice was low, its intensity was both a surrender and a scornful 
reproach: “You know better than that, don’t you?” 

He shook his head. “No, 1 want you to remember that that had 
been your wish. You were right, in the past. So long as you were part 
ot the outer world, you had to seek to destroy me. And of the two 
courses now open to you, one will lead you to the day when you will 
find yourself forced to do it.” She did not answer, she sat looking 
down, he saw the strands of her hair swing jerkily as she shook her 
head in desperate protest. “You are my only danger. You are the 
only person who could deliver me to my enemies. If you remain with 
them, you will. Choose that, if you wish, but choose it with full knowl- 
edge. Don’t answer me now. But until you do” — the stress of seventy 
in his voice was the sound of effort directed against him — “remember 
that I know the meaning of either answer.” 

“As fully as I do?” she whispered 

“As fully ” 

He turned to go, when her eyes fell suddenly upon the inscriptions 
she had noticed, and forgotten, on the walls of the room. 

I hey weie cut into the polish ot the wood, still showing the force 
ol the pencil's pressure in the hands that had made them, each in his 
own violent writing: “You'll get over it— Ellis Wyatt” “It will be all 
right by morning- -Ken Danagger” “It’s w r orth it— Roger Marsh.” 
There were others 

“What is that 0 ” she asked 

He smiled. “This is the room where they spent their first night in 
the valley. The first night is the hardest, it’s the last pull of the break 
with one’s memories, and the worst. 1 let them stay here, so they am 
call for me, if they want me. I speak to them, if they can't sleep. Most 
o| them can't. But they're free of it by morning. . . .They've ail gone 
through this room. Now they call it the torture chamber or the ante- 
mom— because everyone has to enter the valley through my house.” 

He turned to go. he stopped on the threshold and added: 

“This is the room 1 never intended you to occupy. Good night, 
Miss Taggart ” 

Chapter I! THE UTOPIA OF GREED 

“Good morning.” 

She looked at him across the living room from* the threshold of 
her door. In the windows behind him, the mountains had that tinge 
of silver-pink which seems brighter than daylight, with the promise 
of a light to come. The sun had risen somewhere over the earth, but 

689 



it had not reached the top of the barrier, and the sky was glowing 
in its stead, announcing its motion. She had heard the'joyous greeting 
to the sunrise, which was not the song of birds, but the ringing of 
the telephone a moment ago; she saw the start of day, not in the 
shining green of the branches outside, but in the glitter of chromium 
on the stove, the sparkle of a glass ashtray on a table, and the crisp 
whiteness of his shirt sleeves. Irresistibly, she heard the sound of a 
smile in her own voice, matching his, as she answered; 

“Good morning.” 

He was gathering notes of penciled calculations from his desk and 
stuffing them into his pocket. “1 have to go down to the power- 
house,” he said. “They've just phoned me that they’re having trouble 
with the ray screen. Your plane seems to have knocked it off key. 
I'll be back in half an hour and then HI cook our breakfast.” 

It was the casual simplicity of his voice, the manner of taking her 
presence and their domestic routine for granted, as if it were of 
no significance to them, that gave her the sense of an underscored 
significance and the feeling that he knew it. 

She answered as casually, “If you’ll bring me the cane I left in the 
car. I’ll have breakfast ready for you by the time you come back.” 

He glanced at her with a slight astonishment; his eyes moved from 
her bandaged ankle to the short sleeves of the blouse that left her 
arms bare to display the heavy bandage on her elbow. But the trans- 
parent blouse, the open collar, the hair falling down to the shoulders 
that seemed innocently naked under a thin film of cloth, made her 
look like a schoolgirl, not an invalid, and her posture made the 
bandages look irrelevant. 

He smiled, not quite at her, but as if in amusement at some sudden 
memory of his own. “If you wish.” he said. 

It was strange to be left alone in his house. Part of it was an 
emotion she had never experienced before: an awed respect that 
made her hesitantly conscious of her hands, as if to touch any object 
around her would be too great an intimacy. The other part was a 
reckless sense of ease, a sense of being at home in this place, as it 
she owned its owner. 

It was strange to feel so pure a joy in the simple task of preparing 
a breakfast ITie work seemed an end in itself, as if the motions of 
filling a coffee pot, squeezing oranges, slicing bread were performed 
for their own sake, for the sort of pleasure one expects, but seldom 
finds, in the motions of dancing. It startled her to realize that she 
had not experienced this kind of pleasure in her work since her days 
at the operator’s desk m Rockdale Station. 

She was setting the table, when she saw the figure of a man hur- 
rying up the path to the house, a swift, agile figure that leaped over 
boulders with the casual ease of a (light. He threw the door open, 
calling, “Hey, John!”— and stopped short as he saw her. He wore a 
dark blue sweater and slacks, he ha<| gold hair and a face of such 
shocking perfection of beauty that shk stood still, staring at him, not 
in admiration, at first, but in simple disbelief. 

He looked at her as if he had not expected to find a woman in 
this house. Then she saw a look of recognition melting into a differ- 

690 



ent kind of astonishment, part amusement, part triumph melting into 
a chuckle. “Oh, have you joined us?” he asked. 

“No.” she answered dryly, “I haven’t. I’m a scab.” 

He laughed, like an adult at a child who uses technological words 
beyond its understanding. “If you know what you’re saying, you 
know that it’s not possible,” he said. ‘Not here.” 

“I crashed the gate. Literally.” 

He looked at her bandages, weighing the question, his glance al- 
most insolent in its open curiosity. “When?” 

“Yesterday.” 

“How?” 

“In a plane.” 

“What were you doing in a plane in this part of the country?” 

He had the direct, imperious manner of an aristocrat or a rough- 
neck; he looked like one and was dressed like the other. She consid- 
ered him for a moment, deliberately letting him wait. “1 was trying 
to land on a prehistoricai mirage." she answered. “And 1 have.” 

“You arc a scab,” he said, and chuckled, as if grasping all the 
implications of the problem. “Where’s John?” 

“Mr. Galt is at the powerhouse. He should be back any moment.” 

He sat down in an armchair, asking no permission, as if he were 
at home. .She turned silently to her work. He sat watching her move- 
ments with an open grin, as if the sight of her laying out cutlery on 
a kitchen table were the spectacle of some special paradox. 

“What did Francisco say when he saw you here?” he asked. 

She turned to him with a slight jolt, but answered evenly, “He is 
not here yet." 

‘‘Not yet?” He seemed startled “Are you sure?” 

“So I was told." 

He lighted a cigarette. She wondered, watching him, what profes- 
sion he had chosen, loved and abandoned in order to join this valley. 
She could make no guess: none seemed to tit: she caught herself m 
the preposterous feeling of wishing that he had no profession at all, 
because any woik seemed too dangerous for his incredible kind of 
beauty. It was an impersonal feeling, she did not look at him as at 
a man, but as at an animated work of art — and it seemed to be a 
stressed indignity of the outer world that a perfection such as his 
should be subjected to the shocks, the strains, the scars reserved 
lor any man who loved his work. But the feeling seemed the more 
preposterous, because the lines of his face had the sort of hardness 
for which no danger on earth was a match. 

“No, Miss Taggart,” he said suddenly, catching her glance “you’ve 
never seen me before.” 

She was shocked to realize that she had been studying him openly. 
“How do you happen to know who I am?” she asked. 

“First, I’ve seen your pictures in the papers many times. Second, 
you’re the only woman left m the outer world, to the best of oui 
knowledge, who’d be allowed to enter Galt’s Gulch. Third, you're 
the only woman who’d have the courage — and prodigality — still to 
remain a scab.” 

“What made you certain that I was a scab?” 

691 



“If you weren’t, you’d know that it’s not this valley, ljut the view 
of life held by men in the outer world that is a prehistorical mirage.” 

They heard the sound of the motor and saw the car stopping 
below, in front of the house. She noticed the swiftness with whieh 
he rose to his feet at the sight of Galt in the car; if it were not for 
the obvious personal eagerness, it would have looked like an instinc- 
tive gesture of military respect. 

She noticed the way Galt stopped, when he entered and saw his 
visitor. She noticed that Galt smiled, but that his voice was oddly 
low, almost solemn, as if weighted with unconfessed relief, when he 
said very quietly, “Hello.” 

“Hi, John,” said the visitor gaily. 

She noticed that their handshake came an instant too late and 
lasted an instant too long, like the handshake of men who had not 
been certain that their previous meeting would not be their last. 

Galt turned to her. “Have you met?” he asked, addressing them 
both. 

“Not exactly,” said the visitor. 

“Miss Taggart, may l present Ragnar Danneskjdld?” 

She knew what her face had looked like, when she heard Dannes- 
kj old’s voice as from a great distance: “You don't have to be fright- 
ened, Miss Taggart. I’m not dangerous to anyone in Galt’s Gulch,” 

She could only shake her head, before she recaptured her voice 
to say, “It’s not what you're doing to anyone . . . it's what they’TC 
doing to you. ...” 

His laughter swept her out of hei moment's stupor. “Be careful. 
Miss Taggart, If that's how you’re beginning to lee!, you won t re- 
main a scab for long.” He added, “But you ought to start by adopting 
the right things from the people in Galt's Gulch, not their mistakes, 
they've spent twelve years worrying about me- -needlessly,” He 
glanced at Galt. 

“When did you get in?” asked Galt. 

“Late last night.” 

“Sit down. You’re going to have breakfast with us." 

“But where’s Francisco? Why isn’t he here vet?” 

“I don't know,” said Gall, tmwning slightly. “I asked at the an - 
port, just now. Nobody’s heard from him.” 

As she turned to the kitchen, Gail moved to follow. “No.” she 
said, “it’s my job today.” 

“Let me help you.” 

“This is the place where one doesn't ask for help, isn't it?” 

He smiled. “That’s right.” 

She had never experienced the pleasure of motion, of walking as 
if her feet had no weight to carry, as if? the support of the cane in 
her hand were merely a superfluous touch of elegance, the pleasure 
of feeling her steps trace swift, straight Irnes, of sensing the faultless, 
.spontaneous precision of her gestures— «s she experienced it while 
placing their food on the table in front cjf the two men. Her bearing 
told them that she knew they were watching her — she held her head 
like an actress on a stage, like a woman in a ballroom, like the 
winner of a silent contest. 

6<>2 



“Francisco will be glad to know that it’s you who were his stand- 
in today,*’ said Danneskjdld, when she joined them at the table. 

“His what?” 

“You see, today is June first, and the three of us — John, Francisco 
and I— have had breakfast together on every June first for twelve 
years.” 

“Here?” 

“Not when we started. But here, ever since this house was built 
eight years ago.” He shrugged, smiling. “For a man who has more 
centuries of tradition behind him than 1 have, it’s odd that Francisco 
should be the first to break our own tradition.” 

“And Mr. Galt?” she asked. “How many centuries does he have 
behind him?” 

“John? None at all. None behind him— but all of those ahead.” 

“Never mind the centuries,” said Galt. “Tell me what soil of year 
you’ve had behind vou. Lost any rnen?” 

“No.” 

“Lost any of your time?” 

“You mean, was l wounded? No. I haven’t had a scratch since 
that one time, ten years ago, when 1 was still an amateur, which you 
ought to forget by now. 1 wasn't in any danger whatever, this year — 
in fact, J was much more safe than if 1 were running a small-town 
drugstore under Directive 10-289,” 

“Lost any battles 7 ” 

“No. The losses were all on the other side, this year. The looters 
lost most of their ships to me — and most of their men to you. You’ve 
had a good year, too, haven’t you? 1 know, I’ve kept track of it. 
Since our last breakfast together, you got everyone you wanted from 
the state of Colorado, and a tew cithers besides, such as Ken Danag^ 
ger, who was a great prize to get. But let me tell you about a still 
greater one, who is almost yours. You’re going to get him soon, 
because he’s hanging by a thin thread and is just about ready to fall 
at your feet. He's a man who saved my life — so you can sec how 
far he’s gone.” 

Cialt leaned back, his eyes narrowing. “So you weren’t in any 
danger whatever, were you 7 ” 

Danneskjbld laughed. “Oh, 1 took a slight risk, it was worth it. It 
was the most enjoyable encounter I’ve ever had. I’ve been waiting 
to tell you about it in person. It's a story you’ll want to hear Do 
you know who the man was? Hank Rearden. I — ” 

“No!” 

It was Galt's voice; it was a command; the brief snap of sound had 
a tinge of violence neither of them had ever heard from him before. 

“Whal?” asked Datmeskjbld softly, incredulously. 

“Don’t tell me about it now.” 

“But you’ve always said that Hank Rearden was the one man you 
wanted to see here most.” 

“1 still do. But you’ll tell me later.” 

She studied Galt's face intently, but she could find no clue, only 
a closed, impersonal look, either of determination or of control, that 
tightened the skin of his cheekbones and the line of his mouth. No 

693 



matter what he knew about her, she thought, the onlv knowledge 
that could explain this, was a knowledge he had ha<5 no way o 
acquiring. 

' You've met Hank Rearden?” she asked, turning to Danneskjdld 
“And he saved vour life?” 

“Yes.” 

“I warn to hear about it.” 

"1 don’t,” said Galt, 

“Why not?” 

“You’re not one ot us. Miss Taggart." 

“1 see.” She smiled, with a faint touch of defiance. “Were yot 
thinking that l might prevent you from getting Hank Rearden?” 

“No, that was not what 1 was thinking ” 

She noticed that Danneskjold was studying Gulfs lace, as if hr 
too, found the incident inexplicable Galt held his glance, deliberate!’ 
and openly, as il challenging him to find the explanation and promts 
ing that he would fail. She knew that Danneskjold had failed, whci 
she saw a faint crease ol humor softening Galt’s eyelids 

“What else,” asked Galt, “have you accomplished this year 7 ” 

“I’ve defied the law of gravitation " 

“You've always done that. In what particular form now 7 ” 

“In the form of a (light from mid-Atlantic to Colorado m a plan> 
loaded with gold beyond the safety point of its capacity. Wait til 
Midas sees the amount I have to deposit. My customers, this ye;n 
will become richer by — Say. have you told Miss Taggail that she' 
one of my customers?” 

“No, not yet. You may tell her, il you wish.” 

“I’m — What did you say 1 am?” she asked. 

“Don’t be shocked. Miss Taggart,” said Dannesk|old. “And don’ 
object. I'm used to objections. I'm a sort of freak here, anyway 
None of them approve of my particular method of lighting our battle 
John doesn’t, Dr Akston doesn’t. They think that my life is to< 
valuable for it. But, you .see, my father was a bishop— and of all hi 
teachings there was only one sentence that I accepted. ‘All they tha 
take the sword shall perish with the sword.’ ” 

“What do you mean?” 

“That violence is not practical. If my lellow men believe that th 
force of the combined tonnage of theii muscles is a practical mean 
to rule me — let them learn the outcome of a contest in w hich there’ 
nothing but brute force on one side, and force ruled by a mind, oi 
the other. Even John grants me that in our age I had the moral righ 
to choose the course I’ve chosen. I am doing just what he is doing- 
only in my own way. He is withdrawing man’s spirit from the looter* 
I’m withdrawing the products of man’s; spirit. He is depriving ther 
of reason, I'm depriving them of wealth. He is draining the soul o 
the world, I’m draining its body. His is fhe lesson they have to learr 
only I'm impatient and I’m hastening their scholastic progress. Bin 
like John, I’m simply complying with their moral code and refusin 
to grant them a double standard at nty expense. Or at Rearden’ 
expense. Or at yours'” 

“What are you talking about?” 

694 



“About a method of taxing the income taxers. AH methods of 
taxation are complex, but this one is very simple, because it’s the 
naked essence of all the others. Let me explain it to you/’ 

She listened. She heard a sparkling voice reciting, in the tone of 
a dryly meticulous bookkeeper, a report about financial transfers, 
bank accounts, income-tax returns, as if he were reading the dusty 
pages of a ledger — a ledger wheie every entry was made by means 
of offering his own blood as the collateral to be drained at any 
moment, at any slip of his bookkeeping pen. As she listened, she 
kept seeing the perfection of his face- -and she kept thinking that 
this was the head on which the world had placed a price of millions 
for the purpose of delivering it to the rot of death. , . . The face she 
had thought too beautiful tor the scars ot a productive career —she 
kept thinking numbly, missing half his words —the face too beautiful 
to risk. . . . Then it struck her that his physical perfection was only 
a simple illustration, a childish lesson given to her in crudely obvious 
terms on the nature of the outer world and on the fate of any human 
value in a subhuman age: Whatever the justice or the evil of bis 
course, she thought, how could they ... no! she thought, his course 
was just, and this was the honor of it, that there was no other course 
(or justice to select, thal she could not condemn him, that she could 
neither approve nor utter a word of reproach. 

“. . and the names of my customers. Miss Taggart, were chosen 

slowly, one by one 1 had to be certain ot the nature of their charac- 
ter and career. On my list ot restitution, your name was one of 
the first/' 

She forced herself to keep hei face expressionlessly tight, and she 
answered only, ‘ I see/’ 

'Your account is one of the last left unpaid. It is here, at the 
Mulligan Bank, to be claimed by vou on the day when you join us/' 
“l sec/' 

“Your account, however, is not as large as some of the others, 
even though huge sums weie extorted from you by force in the past 
twelve years. You will find- -as it is marked on the copies of your 
income-tax returns which Mulligan will hand over to you — that I 
have refunded only those taxes which you paid on the salary you 
earned as Operating Vice-President, but not the taxes you paid on 
your income from your Taggart I ranscontinental stock. You de- 
served every penny of that stock, and in the days of your father I 
would have refunded every penny of your profit- but under your 
brother's management, Taggart Transcontinental has taken its share 
of the looting, it has made profits by force, by means of government 
favors, subsidies, moratoriums, directives. You were not responsible 
for it. you were, in fact, the greatest victim of that policy — but I 
refunded only the money which was made by pure productive ability, 
not the money any part of which was loot taken by force/’ 

“I see.” 

They had finished their breaklast. Danneskjdld lighted a cigarette 
and watched her for an instant through the first jet of smoke, as if 
he knew the violence of the conflict in her mind- -then he grinned 
at Galt and rose to his feet. 


695 



"FU run along/' he said, '‘My wife is wailing for me.”" 

“ What ?" she gasped. 

"My wife/' he repeated gaily, as if he had not understood the 
reason of her shock. 

"Who is your wife?” 

“Kay Ludlow,” 

The implications that struck her were more than she could bear 
to consider. "When . . . when were you married?” 

"Four years ago.” 

“How could you show yourself anywhere long enough to go 
through a wedding ceremony?” 

"We were married here, by Judge Narragansett.” 

"How can” — she tried to stop, but the words burst involuntarily, 
in helpless indignant protest, whether against him, fate or the outer 
world, she could not tell — "how can she live through eleven months 
of thinking that you. at any moment, might be . . . ?” She did 
not finish. 

He was smiling, but she saw the enormous solemnity of that which 
he and his wife had needed to earn their right to this kind of smile. 
"She can live through it. Miss Taggart, because we do not hold the 
belief that this earth is a realm of misety where man is doomed to 
destruction. We do not think that tragedy is our natural fate and we 
do not live in chronic dread of disaster. We do not expect disaster 
until we have specific reason to expect it — and when we encounter 
it, we are free to fight it. It is not happiness, but suffering that we 
consider unnatural. It is not success, but calamity that we regard as 
the abnormal exception in humaq lilt*.” 

Gall accompanied him to the door, then came back, sat down at 
the table and in a leisurely manner reached for another cup of coffee 

She shot to her feet, as if flung by a jet of pressure breaking a 
safety valve. “Do you think that 1 11 ever accept his money?” 

He waited until the curving streak of coffee had filled his cup, 
then glanced up at her and answered. "Yes. I think so.” 

"Well, 1 won’t! I won't let him risk his life foi it!" 

"You have no choice about that/’ 

"I have the choice never to claim it!” 

"Yes, you have.” 

"Then it will lie in that bank till doomsday!” 

"No, it won’t. If you don’t claim it, some part of it- -a very small 
part— will be turned over to me in your name.” 

"In my name? Why?” 

"To pay for your room and board.” 

She stared at him, her look of anger switching to bewilderment, 
then dropped slowly back on her chair. I 

He smiled. "How long did you think >|du were going to stay here. 
Miss Taggart?” He saw her startled Ipok of helplessness. "You 
haven’t thought of it? I have. You're goifig to stay here for a month. 
For the one month of our vacation, like the rest of us, I am i\ot 
asking for your consent— you did not a$k for ours when you came 
here. You broke our rules, so you’ll have to take the consequences 
Nobody leaves the valley during this month. 1 could let you go. of 

6% 



course, but I won’t. There’s no rule demanding that I hold you, but 
by forcing your way here, you’ve given me the right to any choice I 
make — and Pm going to hold you simply because I want you here. 
If, at the end of a month, you decide that you wish to go back, you 
will be free to do so. Not until then.” 

She sat straight, the planes of her face relaxed, the shape of her 
mouth softened by the faint, purposeful suggestion of a smile; it was 
the dangerous smile of an adversary, but her eyes were coldly bril- 
liant and veiled at once, like the eyes of an adversary who fully 
intends to fight, but hopes to lose. 

’’Very well,” she said. 

“I shall charge you for your room and board — it is against our 
rules to provide the unearned sustenance of another human being. 
Some of us have wives and children, but there is a mutual trade 
involved in that, and a mutual payment” — he glanced at her — ”of a 
kind I am not entitled to collect. So I shall charge you fifty cents a 
day and you will pay me when you accept the account that lies in 
your name at the Mulligan Bank. If you don't accept the account, 
Mulligan will charge your debt against it and he will give me the 
money when 1 ask for it.” 

“I shall comply with your terms,” she answered; her voice K&d the 
shrewd, confident, deliberating slowness of a trader. ’’But 1 shall not 
permit the use of that money tor my debts.” 

“How else do you propose to comply?” 

”1 propose to earn my room and board.” 

“By what means?” 

“By working.” 

“In what capacity?” 

“In the capacity of your cook and housemaid.” 

For the first time, she saw him take the shock of the unexpected, 
m a manner and with a violence she had not foreseen. It was only 
an explosion of laughter on his part— but he laughed as if he were 
hit beyond his defenses, much beyond the immediate meaning of her 
words; she felt that she had struck his past, tearing loose some mem- 
ory and meaning of his own which she could not know. He laughed 
as if he were seeing some distant image, as if he were laughing in 
its face, as if this were his victory — and hers. 

“If you will hire me,” she said, her face severely polite, her tone 
harshly clear, impersonal and businesslike, “I shall cook your meals, 
clean your house, do your laundry and perform such other duties as 
are required of a servant — in exchange for my room, board and such 
money as I will need for some items of clothing, I may be slightly 
handicapped by my injuries for the next few days, but that will not 
last and I will be able to do the job fully.*’ 

“Is that what you want to do?” he asked. 

“That is what 1 want to do — ” she answered, and stopped before 
she uttered the rest of the answer in her mind: more than anything 
else in the world. 

He was still smiling, it was a smile of amusement, but it was as if 
amusement could be transmuted into some shining glory. “All right. 
Miss Taggart,” he said, “I’ll hire you.” 

697 



She inclined her head in a dryly formal acknowledgment. 
“Thank you.” 

“1 will pay you ten dollars a month, in addition to your room 
and board.” 

“Very well.” 

“I shall be the first man in this valley to hire a servant.” He got 
up, reached into his pocket and threw a five-dollar gold piece down 
on the table. “As advance on your wages,” he said. 

She was startled to discover, as her hand reached for the gold 
piece, that she felt the eager, desperate, tremulous hope of a young 
girl on her first job: the hope that she would be able to deserve it. 

“Yes, sir.” she said, her eyes lowered. 

+ * 

Owen Kellogg arrived on the afternoon of her third day m the 
valley. 

She did not know which shocked him most: the sight of her stand- 
ing on the edge of the airfield as he descended from the plane — the 
sight of her clothes: her delicate, transparent blouse, tailored by the 
most expensive shop in New York, and the wide, cotton-print skirt 
she had bought in the valley for sixty cents — her cane, her bandages 
or the basket of groceries on her arm. 

He descended among a group of men. he saw her. he stopped, 
then ran to her as if hung forward by some emotion so strong that, 
whatever its nature, it looked like terror. 

“Miss Taggart . he whispered— and said nothing else, while 
she laughed, trying to explain how she had come to beat him to 
his destination. 

He listened, as if it were irrelevant, and then he uttered the thing 
from which he had to recover, “But we thought you were dead.” 

“Who thought it?” 

“All of us ... I mean, everybody in the outside world.” 

Then she suddenly stopped smiling, while his voice began to recap 
turc his story and his first sound of joy. 

“Miss Taggart, don’t you remember? You told me to phone Win- 
ston, Colorado, and to tell them f hat you'd be there by noon of the 
next day. That was to be the day before yesterday. May thirty-first 
But you did not reach Winston —and by late afternoon, the news 
was on all the radios that you were lost in a plane crash some whoie 
in the Rocky Mountains.” 

She nodded slowly, grasping the events she had not thought ol 
considering. 

“I heard it aboard the Comet,” he saij. “At a small station in the 
middle of New Mexico. The conductor held us there for an hour, 
while I helped him to check the story long-distance phones. He 
was hit by the news just as l was. They a31 were — the train crew, the 
station agent, the switchmen. They huddfed around me while I called 
the city rooms of newspapers in Denver and New York. We didn’t 
learn much. Only that you had left th£ Afton airfield just before 
dawn on May tmrty-fir&t, that you seemed to be following some 
stranger’s plane, that the attendant had seen you go off southeast- 

698 



and that nobody had seen you since ... And that searching parties 
were combing the Rockies for the wreckage of your plane/’ 

She asked involuntarily, “Did the Comet reach San Francisco?” 

“I don’t know She was crawling north through Arizona, when 1 
gave up. There were too many delays, too many things going wrong, 
and a total confusion of orders. 1 got off and spent the night hitchhik- 
ing my way to Colorado, bumming rides on trucks, on buggies, on 
horse carts, to get there on time — to get to our meeting place, l 
mean, where we gather for Midas’ ferry plane to pick us up and 
bring us here.” 

She started walking slowly up the path toward the car she had left 
in front of Hammond’s Grocery Market. Kellogg followed, and when 
he spoke again, his voice dropped a little, slowing down with their 
steps, as if there were something they both wished to delay. 

”1 got a job for Jelf Allen,” he said, his voice had the peculiarly 
solemn tone proper for saying: 1 have carried out your hist will. “Your 
agent at Laurel grabbed him and pul him to work the moment we got 
there. The agent needed every able-bodied- -no, able-minded* —man he 
could find.” 

they had reached the car. but she did not get in. 

“Miss Taggart, you weren’t hurt badly, were you? Did you say 
you crashed, but it wasn’t serious?” 

“No, not serious at all. I'll be able to gel along without Mr. Mulli- 
gan’s car by tomorrow — and in a day or two I won’t need this thing, 
eithci.” She swung her cane and tossed it contemptuously into the 
car. They stood in silence, she was waiting. 

“The last long-distance call 1 made from that station m New Mex- 
ico,” he said slowly, "was to Pennsylvania. 1 spoke to Hank Rcarden. 

I told him everything 1 knew. He listened, and then there was a 
pause, and then he said. Thank you for calling me.’ ” Kellogg’s eyes 
were lowered; he added, T never want to hear that kind of pause 
again as long as 1 live.” 

He raised his eyes to hers; there was no reproach in his glance, 
only the knowledge of that which he had not suspected when he 
hcaid her request, but had guessed since. 

“Thank you,” she said, and threw the door of the car open. “Can 
1 give you a lift? I have to get back and get dinner ready before my 
employer comes home.” 

It was in the first moment of returning to Galt’s house, of standing 
alone in the silent, sun-filled room, that she faced the full meaning of 
what she felt. She looked at the window, at the mountains barring 
the sky m the east. She thought of Hank Rcarden as he sat at his 
desk, now, two thousand miles away, his face tightened into a re- 
taining wall against agony, as it had been tightened under all the 
blows of all his years — and she felt a desperate wish to tight his 
battle, to fight for him, for his past, for that tension of his face and 
the courage that fed it — as she wanted to fight for the Comet that 
crawled by a last effort across a desert on a crumbling track. She 
shuddered* closing her eyes, feeling as if she were guilty of double 
treason, feeling as if she were suspended in space "between this valley 
and the rest of the earth, with no right to either. 

699 



The feeling vanished when she sat facing Galt across the dinner 
table. He was watching her, openly and with an untroubled look, as 
if her presence were normal — and as if the sight of her were all he 
wished to allow into his consciousness. 

She leaned back a little, as if complying with the meaning of his 
glance, and said dryly, efficiently, m deliberate denial, “I have 
checked your shirts and found one with two buttons missing, and 
another with the left elbow worn through. Do you wish me to 
mend them?” 

“Why, yes- -if you can do it.” 

“I can do it.” 

It did not seem to alter the nature of his glance; it merely seemed 
to stress its satisfaction, as il this were what he had wished her to 
say — except that she was not certain whether satisfaction was the 
name for the thing she saw in his eyes and fully certain that he had 
not wished her to say anything. 

Beyond the window, at the edge ot the table, storm clouds had 
wiped out the last remnants of light in the eastern sky. She wondered 
why she felt a sudden reluctance to look out. why she felt as if she 
wanted to cling to the golden patches of light on the wood ot the 
table, on the buttered ciust of the rolls, on the copper cotfec pot, 
on Galt’s hair — to cling as to a small island on the edge of a void. 

Then she heard her own voice asking suddenly, involuntarily, and 
she knew that this was the treason she had wanted to escape, “Do 
you permit any communication with the outside world?” 

“No.” 

“Not any? Not even a note without return address?” 

“No.” 

“Not even a message, if no secret of yours were given away?” 

“Not from here. Not during this month. Not to outsiders at any 
time.” 

She noticed that she was avoiding his eyes, and she forced herself 
to lift her head and face him. His glance had changed; it was watch- 
ful, unmoving, implacably perceptive. He asked, looking at her as 
if he knew the reason of hei query, “Do you wish to ask for a 
special exception?” 

“No,” she answered, holding his glance. 

Next morning, after breakfast, when she sat in her room, carefully 
placing a patch on the sleeve ot Galt’s shirt, with her door closed, 
not to let him see her fumbling effort at an unfamiliar task, she 
heard the sound of a car stopping in front of the house. 

She heard Galt’s steps hurrying across the living room, she heard 
him jerk the entrance door open and call out with the joyous anger 
of relief: “It's about time!” I 

She rose to her feet, but stopped; s He heard his voice, its tone 
abruptly changed and grave, as if in artswer to the shock of some 
sight confronting him: “What’s the matter?” 

“Hello, John,” said a clear, quiet voifce that sounded steady, but 
weighted with exhaustion. 

She sat down on her bed, feeling suddenly drained of strength: 
the voice was Francisco’s. 


700 



She heard Galt asking, his tone severe with concern* “What is it?* 

‘Til tell you afterwards.” 

“Why are you so late?” 

”1 have to leave again in an hour.” 

“To leaveT ’ 

“John, I just came to tell you that 1 won’t be able to stay here 
this year.” 

There was a pause, then Galt asked gravely, his voice low, “Is it 
as bad as that — whatever it is?” 

“Yes. 1 ... I might be back before the month is over. I don’t 
know.” He added, with the sound of a desperate effort, “I don’t 
know whether to hope to be done with it quickly or ... or not.” 

“Francisco, could you stand a shock right now?” 

“I? Nothing could shock me now.” 

“There’s a person, here, in my guest room, whom you have to 
see. It will be a shock to you, so I think I’d better warn you in 
advance that this person is still a scab.” 

“ What'l A scab? In your house?” 

“Let me tell you how — ” 

“That’s something I want to see for myself!” 

She heard Francisco’s contemptuous chuckle and the rush of his 
steps, she saw her door flung open, and she noticed dimly that it 
was Galt who closed it, leaving them alone. 

She did not know how long Francisco stood looking at her. be* 
cause the first moment that she grasped fully was when she saw him 
on his knees, holding onto her, his face pressed to her legs, the 
moment when she felt as if the shudder that ran through his body 
and left him still, had run into hers and made her able to move. 

She saw, in astonishment, that her hand was moving gently over 
his hair, while she was thinking that she had no right to do it and 
feeling as if a current of serenity were flowing from her hand, envel- 
oping them both, smoothing the past. He did not move, he made no 
sound, as if the act of holding her said everything he had to say. 

When he raised his head, he looked as she had felt when she had 
opened her eyes m the valley: he looked as if no pain had ever 
existed in the world. He was laughing. 

“Dagny, Dagny, Dagny”— his voice sounded, not as if a confession 
resisted for years were breaking out, but as if he were repeating the 
long since known, laughing at the pretense that it had ever been 
unsaid- -“of course I love you. Were you afraid when he made me 
say it? I’ll say it as often as you wish — 1 love you, darling, I love 
you, I always will — don’t be afraid for me, I don’t care if I’ll never 
have you again, what does that matter? — you’re alive and you’re 
here and you know everything now. And it’s so simple, isn’t it? Do 
you see what it was and why I had to desert you?” His arm swept 
out to point at the valley. “There it is-— it’s your earth, your kingdom, 
your kind of world — Dagny, I’ve always loved you and that 1 de- 
serted you, that was my love.” 

He took her hands and pressed them to his lips and held them, 
not moving, not as a kiss, but as a long moment of rest, as if the 
effort ot speech were a distraction from the fact of her presence, 

701 



and as if he were tom by too many things to say, by the pressure 
of all the words stored in the silence of years. 

‘The women I chased — you didn’t believe that, did you? I’ve 
never touched one of them — but I think you knew it, I think you've 
known it all along. The playboy — it was a part that 1 had to play in 
order not to let the looters suspect me while 1 was destroying d'An- 
conia Copper in plain sight of the whole world. That’s the joker in 
their system, they’re out to light any man of honor and ambition, 
but let them see a worthless rotter and they think he’s a friend, they 
think he’s safe — safe! — that’s their view of life, but are they learn- 
ing! — are they learning whether evil is safe and incompetence 
practical! . . . Dagny, it was the night when 1 knew, for the first time, 
that I loved you — it was then that I knew 1 had to go. It was when 
you entered my hotel room, that night, when I saw what you looked 
like, what you were, what you meant to me — and what awaited you 
in the future. Had you been less, you might have stopped me for a 
while. But it was you. you who were the final argument that made 
me leave you. I asked for your help, that night — against John Galt 
But I knew that you were his best weapon against me, though neither 
you nor he could know it. You were everything that lie was seeking, 
everything he told us to live for or die, if necessary. ... 1 was ready 
for him, when he called me suddenly to conic to New York, that 
spring. 1 had not heard from him lor some time. He was fighting the 
same problem l was. He solved it. . . . Do you remember? It was 
the time when you did not hear fiom me for three years. Dagny. 
when I took over my father’s business, when 1 began to deal with 
the whole industrial system of the world, it was then that I began to 
see the nature of the evil 1 had suspected, but thought loo monstious 
to believe. 1 saw' the tax-collecting vermin that had grown for centu- 
ries like mildew on d’Anconia Copper, draining us by no right that 
anyone could name— I saw r the government regulations passed to 
cripple me, because I was successful, and to help my competitors, 
because they were loafing (allures — I saw the labor unions who won 
every claim against me, by reason of my ability to make their liveli- 
hood possible — I saw that any man’s desire for money he could not 
earn was regarded as a righteous wish, but if he earned it, it was 
damned as greed — l saw the politicians who winked at me, telling 
me not to worry, because I could just work a little harder and out- 
smart them all. I looked past the profits ol ihc moment, and 1 saw 
that the harder I worked, the more 1 tightened the noose around 
my throat, I saw that my energy was being poured down a sewer, 
that the parasites who fed on me were being fed upon in theii turn, 
that they were caught in their own trap — and that there was no 
reason for it, no answer known to anyone, that the sewer pipers of 
the world, draining its productive blood, led into some dank fog 
nobody had dared to pierce, while people merely shrugged and said 
that life on earth could be nothing but evil. And then 1 saw that the 
whole industrial establishment of the wqrid, with all of its magnifi- 
cent machinery, its thousand-ton furnaces, its transatlantic cables, its 
mahogany offices, its stock exchanges, ifs blazing electric signs, its 
power, its wealth — all of it was run, not by bankers and boards of 

702 



directors, but by any unshaved humanitarian in any basement beer 
joint, by any face pudgy with malice, who preached that virtue must 
be penalized for being virtue, that the purpose of ability is to serve 
incompetence, that man has no right to exist except for the sake of 
others. ... 1 knew it. 1 saw no way to fight it. John found the way. 
There were just the two of us with him, the night when we came to 
New York in answer to his call, Ragnar and f. He told us what we 
had to do and what sort of men we had to reach. He had quit the 
Twentieth Century. He was living in a garret in a slum neighborhood. 
He stepped to the window and pointed at the skyscrapers of the city. 
He said that we had to extinguish the lights of the world, and when 
we would see the lights of New York go out, we would know that 
our job was done. He did not ask us to join him at once. He told 
us to think it over and to weigh everything it would do to our lives. 

I gave him my answer on the morning of the second day. and Ragnar 
a few hours later, in the afternoon. , . . Dagny, that was the morning 
after our last night together. I had seen, in a manner of vision that 
1 couldn’t escape, what it was that I had to fight for. It was for the 
way you looked that night, for the way you talked about your rail- 
road — for the way you had looked when we tried to see the skyline 
of New York from the top of a rock over the Hudson — 1 had to 
save you, to clear the way for you. to let you find your city— not to 
let you stumble the years of your life away, struggling on through a 
poisoned fog, with your eyes still held straight ahead, still looking 
a.s they had looked in the sunlight, struggling on to find, at the end 
of your road, not the towers of a city, but a fat, soggy, mindless 
cripple performing his enjoyment of life by means of swallowing the 
gin your life had gone to pay for! You — to know no joy in order 
that he may know it? You — to serve as fodder for the pleasure of 
others? You — as the means for the subhuman as the end? Dagny, 
that was what I saw and that was what I couldn't let them do to 
you! Not to you, not to any child who had your kind of look when 
he faced the future, not to any man who had your spirit and was 
able to experience a moment of being proudly, guiltlessly, confi- 
dently, joyously alive. That was my love, that state of the human 
spirit, and I left you to fight for it, and 1 knew that if I were to lose 
you, it was still you that 1 would be winning with every year of the 
battle. But you see it now, don't you? You’ve seen this valley. It's 
the place we set out to reach when we were children, you and I, 
We’ve reached it. What else can 1 ask for now? Just to see you 
here— did John say you’re still a scab? — oh well, it’s only a matter 
of time, but you’ll be one of us, because you’ve always been, if you 
don't see it fully, we’ll wait, 1 don’t care — so long as you’re alive, so 
long as I don’t have to go on flying over the Rockies, looking for 
the wreckage of your plane!" 

She gasped a little, realizing why he had not come to the valley 
on time. 

He laughed. "Don’t look like that. Don’t look at me as if 1 were 
a wound that you’re afraid to touch." 

"Francisco, I’ve hurt you in so many different ways—" 

"No! No, you haven't hurl me— and he hasn’t either, don’t say 

703 



anything about it, it’s he who’s hurt, but we’U save him and he’ll 
come here, too, where he belongs, and he’ll know, and then he, too, 
will be able to laugh about it. Dagny, I didn’t expect you to wait, I 
didn’t hope, I knew the chance I’d taken, and if it had to be anyone. 
I’m glad it’s he.” 

She closed her eyes, pressing her lips together not to moan. 

“Darling, don’t! Don’t you see that I’ve accepted it?" 

But it isn’t— she thought — it isn’t he, and 1 can’t tell you the truth, 
because it’s a man who might never hear it from me and whom I 
might never have. 

“Francisco, 1 did love you — " she said, and caught her breath, 
shocked, realizing that she had not intended to say it and, simultane- 
ously, that this was not the tense she had wanted to use. 

“But you do," he said calmly, smiling. “You still love me— even 
if there’s one expression of it that you’ll always feel and want, but 
will not give me any longer. I'm still what I was. and you'll always 
see it, and you’ll always grant me the same response, even if there's 
a greater one that you grant to another man. No matter what you 
feel for him, it will not change what you feel for me, and it won’L 
be treason to either, because it comes from the same root, it’s the 
same payment in answer to the same values. No matter what happens 
in the future, we’ll always be what we were to each other, you and 
I, because you’ll always love me." 

“Francisco," she whispered, “do you know that?" 

“Of course. Don’t you understand it now? Dagny. every form of 
happiness is one, every desire is driven by the same motor- -by our 
love for a single value, lor the highest potentiality of our own exis- 
tence — and every achievement is an expression of it. Look around 
you. Do you see how much is open to us here, on an unobstructed 
earth? Do you see how much 1 am (ree to do, to experience, to 
achieve? Do you see that all of it is part of what you are to me — 
as I am part of it for you? And if I’ll see you smile with admiration 
at a new copper smelter that I built, it will be another torm of what 
I felt when I lay in bed beside you. Will I want to sleep with you? 
Desperately. Will I envy the man who does? Sure. But what does 
that matter? It’s so much— just to have you here, to love you and 
to be alive." 

Her eyes lowered, her face stern, holding her head bowed as in 
an act of reverence, she said slowly, as if fu Killing a solemn promise, 
“Will you forgive me?" 

He looked astonished, then chuckled gaily, remembering, and an- 
swered, “Not yet. There’s nothing to forgive, but I’ll forgive it when 
you join us." • 

He rose, he drew her to her feet- and !when his arms closed about 
her, their kiss was the summation of theif' past, its end and their seal 
of acceptance. 

Galt turned to them from across the living room, when they came 
out. He had been standing at a window^ looking at the valley — and 
she felt certain that he had stood there all that time. She saw his 
eyes studying their faces, his glance moving slowly from one to the 

704 



other. His face relaxed a little at the sight of the change in 
Francisco's. 

Francisco smiled, asking him, “Why do you stare at me?" 

“Do you know what you looked like when you came in?" 

“Oh, did l? That's because 1 hadn't slept for three nights. John, 
will you invite me to dinner? I want to know how this scab of yours, 
got here, but I think that I might collapse sound asleep in the middle 
of a sentence — even though right now l feel as if III never need any 
sleep at all — so I think I'd better go home and stay there till 
evening." 

Galt was watching him with a faint smile. “But aren't you going 
to leave the valley in an hour?" 

“What? No . . he said mildly, in momentary astonishment. 
“No!" he laughed exultantly. “I don’t have to! That's right, I haven't 
told you what it was, have 1? I was searching for Dagny. For . . . 
for the wreck of her plane. She’d been reported lost in a crash in 
the Rockies." 

“1 see," said Galt quietly. 

“1 could have thought of anything, except that she would choose 
to crash in Galt's Gulch," Francisco said happily; he had the tone 
of that joyous relief which almost relishes the horror of the past, 
defying it by means of the present. “I kept flying over the district 
between Alton, Utah, and Winston, Colorado, over every peak and 
crevice of it, over every remnant of a car in any gully below, and 
whenever I saw one, 1 — " He stopped; it looked like a shudder. 
“Then at night, we went out on foot--- the searching parties of rail- 
road men from Winston — we went climbing at random, with no clues, 
no plan, on and on, until it was daylight again, and — " He shrugged, 
trying to dismiss it and to smile. “I wouldn’t wish it on my worst — " 

He stopped short; his smile vanished and a dim reflection of the 
look he had worn for three days came back to his face, as if at the 
sudden presence of an image he had forgotten. 

After a long moment, he turned to Galt. “John," his voice sounded 
peculiarly solemn, “could we notify those outside that Dagny is 
alive ... in case there's somebody who . . . who'd feel as I did?" 

Galt was looking straight at him. “Do you wish to give any out- 
sider any relief from the consequences of remaining outside?" 

Francisco dropped his eyes, but answered firmly, “No." 

“Pity, Francisco? " 

“Yes. Forget it. You’re right." 

Galt turned away with a movement that seemed oddly out of char- 
acter: it had the unrhythmical abruptness of the involuntary. 

He did not turn back; Francisco watched him in astonishment, 
then asked softly, “What's the matter?" 

Galt turned and looked at him for a moment, not answering. She 
could not identify the emotion that softened the lines of Galt’s face; 
it had the quality of a smile, of gentleness, of pain, and of something 
greater that seemed to make these concepts superfluous. 

“Whatever any of us has paid for this battle," said Galt, “you're 
the one who’s taken the hardest beating, aren’t you?" 

“Who? 1?" Francisco grinned with shocked, incredulous amuse- 

705 



mcnt. “Certainly not! What’s the matter with you?” He chuckled 
and added, “Pity, John?” 

“No,” said Galt firmly. 

She saw Francisco watching him with a laint, puzzled frown — 
because Galt had said it, looking, not at him, but at her. 

* * 

The emotional sum that struck her as an immediate impression ot 
Francisco’s house, when she entered it lor the first time, was not the 
sum she had once drawn from the sight of its silent, locked exterior. 
She felt, not a sense of- tragic loneliness, but of invigorating bright- 
ness. The rooms were bare and crudely simple, the house seemed 
built with the skill, the decisiveness and the impatience typical of 
Francisco; it looked like a frontiersman's shanty thrown together to 
serve as a mere springboard for a long flight into the future— a future 
where so great a field of activity lay waiting that no time could be 
wasted on the comfort of its start The place had the brightness, not 
of a home, but of a fresh wooden scaffolding erected to shelter the 
birth ol a skyscraper 

Francisco, in shirt sleeves, stood in the middle of his twelve-foot- 
square living room, with the look of a host in a palace. Of all the 
places where she had ever seen him. this was the background that 
seemed most properly his. Just as the simplicity of his clothes, added 
to his bearing, gave him the air of a superlative aristocrat, so the 
crudeness of the room gave it the appearance ol the most patrician 
retreat; a single royal touch was added to the crudeness* two ancient 
silver goblets stood in a small niche cut in a wall of bare logs; their 
ornate design had required the luxury of some craftsman’s long and 
costly labor, more labor than had gone to build the shanty, a design 
dimmed by the polish of more centuries than had gone to grow the 
log wall’s pines. In the midst of that room, Francisco’s easy, natural 
manner had a touch of quiet pride, as if his smile were silently saying 
to her; This is what I am and what I have been all these years. 

She looked up at the silver goblets. 

“Yes,” he said, in answer to her silent guess, “they belonged to 
Sebastian d’Anconia and his wife. That’s the only thing I brought 
here from my palace in Buenos Aires. That, and the crest over the 
door. It’s all I wanted to save. Everything else will go, in a very few 
months now.” He chuckled. “They'll seize it, all of it. the last dregs 
of d’Anconia C opper, but they’ll be surprised. They won't find much 
for their trouble. And as to that palace, they won’t be able to afford 
even its heating bill.” 

“And then?” she asked. “Where will you go from there?” 

“f? 1 will go to work for d’Anconia Copper.” 

“What do you mean?” j 

“Do you remember that old slogan: ‘The king is dead, long live 
the king*? When the carcass of my ancestors’ property is out of the 
way, then my mine will become the youing new body of d’Anconia 
Copper, the kind of property my ancestors had wanted, had worked 
for, had deserved, but had never owned.” 

“Kowr mine? What mine? Where?” 

706 



“Here/’ he said, pointing toward the mountain peaks. “Didn’t you 
know it?” 

“No.” 

“I own a copper mine that the looters won’t reach, ft's here, in 
these mountains. I did the prospecting, I discovered it, 1 broke the 
first excavation. It was over eight years ago. I was the first man to 
whom Midas sold land in this valley I bought that mine. I started 
it with my own hands, as Sebastian d’Aneonia had started. I have a 
superintendent in charge of it now, who used to be my best metallur- 
gist in CTiilc. The mine produces all the copper we require. My profits 
are deposited at the Mulligan Bank, rhat will be all 1 11 have, a few 
months from now That will be all I’ll need.” 

— to conquer the world, was the way his voice sounded on his last 
sentence- -and she marveled at the difference between that sound 
and the shameful, mawkish tone, half whine, halt -threat, the lone of 
beggar and thug combined, which the men of their century had given 
to the word “need.” 

“Dagny,” he was saying, standing at (he window, as if looking out 
at the peaks, not of mountains, but ot time, “the rebirth of d’Anconia 
Copper — and of the world — has to start here, in the United States, 
t his country was the only country in history born, not of chance and 
blind tubal warfare, but as a lational product of man’s mind. This 
country was built on the supremacy of reason — and, for one mag- 
nificent century, it redeemed the world. It will have to do so again. 
The first step of d’Anconm Copper, as of any other human value, 
has to come from here — because the rest of the earth has reached 
the consummation of the beliefs it has held through the ages: mystic 
faith, the supremacy of the irrational, which has but two monuments 
at the end of its course* the lunatic asylum and the graveyard. . . . 
Sebastian d’Anconia committed one error: he accepted a system 
which declared that the property he had earned by right, was to be 
his, not by right, but by permission. His descendants paid for that 
error. I have made the last payment. . . 1 think that 1 will see the 

day when, growing out from their root in this soil, the mines, the 
smelteis, the ore docks of d'Ancoma Copper will spread again 
through the world and down to my native country, and l will be the 
first to start my country’s rebuilding. I may see it, but I cannot be 
certain. No man can predict the time when others will choose to 
return to reason. It may be that at the end of my life, 1 shall have 
established nothing but this single mine — d’Anconia Copper No. 1. 
Galt’s Gulch, Colorado, IJ.S.A. But, Dagny, do you remember that 
my ambition was to double my father’s production of copper? 
Dagny, if at the end of my life, l produce but one pound of copper 
a year, I will be richer than m\ father, richer than all my ancestors 
with all their thousands of tons — because that one pound will be 
mine by right and will be used to maintain a world that knows it!” 

This was the Francisco of their childhood, in bearing, in manner, 
in the unclouded brilliance of his eyes — and she found herself ques- 
tioning him about his copper mine, as she had questioned him about 
his industrial projects on their walks on the shore of the Hudson, 
recapturing the sense ot an unobstiucted future. 

707 



4 T1I take you to see the mine,” he said, ‘‘as soon as* your ankle 
recovers completely. We have to climb a steep trail to get there, just 
a mule trail, there's no truck road as yet. Let me show you the new 
smelter I'm designing. I’ve been working on it for some time, it’s 
too complex for our present volume of production, but when the 
mine’s output grows to justify it — just take a look at the time, labor 
and money that it will save!" 

They were sitting together on the floor, bending over the sheets 
of paper he spread before her, studying the intricate sections of the 
smelter — with the same joyous earnestness they had once brought 
to the study of scraps in a junk yard. 

She leaned forward just as he moved to reach for another sheet, 
and she found herself leaning against his shoulder. Involuntarily, she 
held still for one instant, no longer than for a small break in the 
flow of a single motion, while her eyes rose to his. He was looking 
down at her, neither hiding what he felt nor implying any further 
demand. She drew back, knowing that she had felt the same desire 
as his. 

Then, still holding the recaptured sensation of what she had telt 
for him m the past, she grasped a quality that had always been part 
of it, now suddenly clear to her for the first time: if that desire was 
a celebration of one's life, then what she had felt for Francisco had 
always been a celebration of her future, like a moment of splendor 
gained in part payment of an unknown total, affirming some promise 
to come. In the instant when she grasped it. she knew also the only 
desire she had ever experienced not in token ol the future but of 
the full and final present. She knew it by means of an image — the 
image of a man’s figure standing at the door of a small granite struc- 
ture. The final form of the promise that had kept hei moving, she 
thought, was the man who would, perhaps, remain a promise novel 
to be reached. 

But this — she thought in consternation — was that view of human 
destiny which she had most passionately haled and rejected: the view 
that man was ever to be drawn by some vision of the unattainable 
shining ahead, doomed ever to aspire, but not to achieve. Her file 
and her values could not bring her to that, she thought; she had 
never found beauty in longing for the impossible and had never 
found the possible to be beyond her reach. But she had come to it 
and she could find no answer. 

She could not give him up or give up the world - she thought, 
looking at Galt, that evening. The answer seemed harder to find in 
his presence. She telt that no problem existed, that nothing could 
stand beside the fact ot seeing hitn and nothing would ever have the 
power to make her leave — and, simultaneously, that she would have 
no right to look at him if she were to, renounce her railroad. She 
felt that she owned him, that the unnhmed had been understood 
between them from the start — and, simultaneously, that he was able 
to vanish from her life and, on some future street of the outside 
world, to pass her by in unweighted indifference. 

She noted that he did not question her about Francisco. When she 
spoke of her visit, she could find no reaction in his face, neither of 

708 



approval nor of resentment. It seemed to her that she caught an 
imperceptible shading in his gravely attentive expression: he looked 
as if this were a matter about which he did not choose to feel 

Her faint apprehension grew into a question mark, and the ques- 
tion mark turned into a drill cutting deeper and deeper into her 
mind through the evenings that followed — when Galt left the house 
and she remained alone. He went out every other night, after dinner, 
not telling her where he went, returning at midnight or later. She 
tried not to allow herself fully to discover with what tension and 
restlessness she waited for his return. She did not ask him where he 
spent his evenings. The reluctance that stopped her was her too 
urgent desire to know; she kept silent in some dimly intentional form 
of defiance, half in defiance of him, half of her own anxiety. 

She would not acknowledge the things she feared or give them 
the solid shape of words, she knew them only by the ugly, nagging 
pull of an unadmitted emotion. Part of it was a savage resentment, 
of a kind she had never experienced before, which was her answer 
to the dread that there might be a woman in his life; yet the resent- 
ment was softened by some quality of health in the thing she feared, 
as if the threat could be fought and even, if need be, accepted. But 
there was another, uglier dread; the sordid shape of self-sacnfice, the 
suspicion, not to be uttered about him, that he wished to remove 
himself from her path and let its emptiness force her back to the 
man who was his best-loved friend. 

Days passed before she spoke of it. Then, at dinner, on an evening 
when he was to leave, she became suddenly aware of the peculiar 
pleasure she experienced while watching him eat the food she had 
prepared — and suddenly, involuntarily, as if that pleasure gave her 
a right she dared not identify, as if enjoyment, not pain, broke her 
resistance, she heard herself asking him, “What is it you’re doing 
every' other evening?” 

He answered simply, as if he had taken for granted that she knew 
it, “Lecturing.” 

“What?” 

“Giving a course of lectures on physics, as I do every year during 
this month. It's my . . . What are you laughing at?” he asked, seeing 
the look of relief, of silent laughter that did not seem to be directed 
at his words — and then, before she answered, he smiled suddenly, as 
if he had guessed the answer, she saw some particular, intensely 
personat quality in his smile, which was almost a quality of insolent 
intimacy— in contrast to the calmly impersonal, casual manner with 
which he went on. “You know that this is the month when we all 
trade the achievements of our real professions. Richard Halley is to 
give concerts, Kay Ludlow is to appear in two plays written by au- 
thors who do not write for the outside world — and 1 give lectures, 
reporting on the work Pvc done during the year.” 

“Free lectures?” 

“Certainly not. It's ten dollars per person for the course.” 

“I want to hear you.” 

He shook his head. “No. You’ll be allowed to attend the concerts, 
the plays or any form of presentation for your own enjoyment, but 

m 



not my lectures or any other sale of ideas which you might carry out 
of this valley. Besides, my customers, or students, are only those 
who have a practical purpose in taking my course: Dwight Sanders, 
Lawrence Hammond, Dick McNamara, Owen Kellogg, a few others. 
I’ve added one beginner this year: Quentin Daniels.” 

‘"Really?” she said, almost with a touch of jealousy. “How can he 
afford anything that expensive?” 

“On credit. I’ve given him a time-payment plan. He’s worth it.” 

“Where do you lecture?” 

“In the hangar, on Dwight Sanders’ farm.” 

“And where do you work during the year'*” 

“In my laboratory.” 

She asked cautiously, “Where is your laboratory? Here, in the 
valley?” 

He held her eyes for a moment, letting her see that his glance was 
amused and that he knew her purpose, then answered, “No.” 

“You’ve lived in the outside world for all of these twelve Years?” 

“Yes.” 

“Do you”— the thought seemed unbearable— “do you hold some 
such job as the others?” 

“Oh yes.” The amusement in his eyes seemed stressed by some 
special meaning. 

“Don't tell me that you’re a second assistant bookkeeper!” 

“No, I’m not.” 

“Then what do you do?” 

“I hold the kind o( job that the world wishes me to hold.” 

“Where?” 

He shook his head. “No, Miss Taggart. It you decide to leave the 
valley, this is one of the things that you are not to know.” 

He smiled again with that insolently personal quality which now 
seemed to say that he knew the threat contained in his answer and 
what it meant to her, then he rose from the table. 

When he had gone, she felt as if the motion of time were an 
oppressive weight in the stillness of the house, like a stationary, half- 
solid mass slithering slowly into some faint elongation by a tempo 
that left her no measure to know whether minutes had passed or 
hours. She lay half-stretched in an armchair of the living room, crum- 
pled by that heavy, indifferent lassitude which is not the will to 
laziness, but the frustration of the will to a secret violence that no 
lesser action can satisfy. 

That special pleasure she had felt in watching him eat the food 
she had prepared — she thought, lying still, her eyes closed, her mind 
moving, like time, through some realm of veiled slowness- -it had 
been the pleasure of knowing that .sh£ had provided him with a 
sensual enjoyment, that one form of his foody’s satisfaction had come 
from her. . . . There is reason, she thought, why a woman, would 
wish to cook for a man . . . oh, not as a duty, not as a chronic career, 
only as a rare and special rite in symbol of . . . but what have 
they made of it, the preachers of woman’s duty? . . . The castrated 
performance of a sickening drudgery was held to be a woman’s 
proper virtue — while that which gave it meaning and sanction was 

710 



held as a shameful sin . . . the work of dealing with grease, steam 
and slimy peelings in a recking kitchen was held to be a spiritual 
matter, an act of compliance with her moral duty — while the meeting 
of two bodies in a bedroom was held to be a physical indulgence, 
an act of surrender to an animal instinct, with no glory, meaning or 
pride of spirit to be claimed by the animals involved. 

She leaped abruptly to her feet. She did not want to think of the 
outer world or of its moral code. But she knew that that was not 
the subject of her thoughts. And she did not want to think of the 
subject her mind was intent on pursuing, the subject to which it kept 
returning against her will, by some will of its own. . . . 

She paced the room, hating the ugly, jerky, uncontrolled looseness 
of her movements — torn between the need to let her motion break 
the stillness, and the knowledge that this was not the form of break 
she wanted. She lighted cigarettes, for an instant’s illusion of pur* 
poseful action — and discarded them within another instant, feeling 
the weary distaste of a substitute purpose. She looked at the room 
like a restless beggar, pleading with physical objects to give her a 
motive, wishing she could find something to dean, to mend, to pol- 
ish-while knowing that no task was worth the effort. When nothing 
seems worth the effort — said some stern voice in her mind — it’s a 
screen to hide a wish that’s worth too much; what do you want? . . . 
She snapped a match, viciously jerking the flame to the tip of a 
cigarette she noticed hanging, unlighted, in the corner of her 
mouth. . . . What do you want? — repeated the voice that sounded 
severe as a judge. I want him to come back! — she answered, throwing 
the words, as a soundless cry, at some accuser within her. almost as 
one would throw a bone to a pursuing beast, in the hope of dis- 
tt acting it from pouncing upon the rest. 

I want him back— she said softly, in answer to the accusation that 
there was no reason lor so great an impatience. . . I want him 
back — she said pleadingly, in answer to the cold reminder that her 
answer did not balance the judge’s scale. ... I want him back! — she 
cried defiantly, lighting not to drop the one superfluous, protective 
word in that sentence. 

She felt her head drooping with exhaustion, as after a prolonged 
beating. The cigarette she saw between her fingers had burned the 
mere length of half an inch. She ground it out and fell into the 
armchair again. 

I'm not evading it — she thought — I’m not evading it, it’s jast that 
1 can see no way to any answer. . . . That which you want — said the 
voice, while she stumbled through a thickening fog — is yours for the 
taking, but anything less than your full acceptance, anything less than 
your full conviction, is a betrayal of everything he is. . . . Then let 
him damn me — she thought, as if the voice were now lost in the fog 
and would not hear her — let him damn me tomorrow. ... 1 want 
him . . . back. . . . She heard no answer, because her head had 
fallen softly against the chair; she was asleep. 

When she opened her eyes, she saw him standing three feet away, 
looking down at her, as if he had been watching her for some time. 

She saw his face and, with the clarity of undivided perception, she 

711 



saw the meaning of the expression on his face: it was the meaning 
she had fought for hours. She saw it without astonishment, because 
she had not yet regained her awareness of any reason why it should 
astonish her. 

“This is the way you look,” he said softly, “when you fall asleep 
in your office/' and she knew that he, too, was not fully aware of 
letting her hear it: the way he said it told her how often he had 
thought of it and for what reason. “You look as if you would awaken 
in a world where you had nothing to hide or to fear,” and she knew 
that the first movement of her face had been a smile, she knew it 
in the moment when it vanished, when she grasped that they were 
both awake. He added quietly, with full awareness, “But here, it’s 
true.” 

Her first emotion of the realm of reality was a sense of power. 
She sat up with a flowing, leisurely movement of confidence, feeling 
the flow of the motion from muscle to muscle through her body. She 
asked, and it was the slowness, the sound of casual curiosity, the 
tone of taking the implications for granted, that gave to her voice 
the faintest sound of disdain, “How did you know what I look like 
in . . . my office?” 

“I told you that I've watched you for years.” 

“How were you able to watch me that thoroughly? From where?” 

“I will not answer you now,” he said, simply, without defiance. 

The slight movement of her shoulder leaning back, the pause, then 
the lower, huskier tone of her voice, left a hint of smiling triumph 
to trail behind her words: “When did you see me for the first time?” 

“Ten years ago,” he answered, looking straight at her, letting her 
see that he was answering the full, unnamed meaning of her question. 

“Where?” The word was almost a command. 

He hesitated, then she saw a faint smile that touched only his lips, 
not his eyes, the kind of smile from which one contemplates— with 
longing, bitterness and pride — a possession purchased at an excruci- 
ating cost; his eyes seemed directed, not at her, but at the girl of 
that time. “Underground, in the Taggart Terminal,” he answered. 

She became suddenly conscious of her posture: she had let her 
shoulder blades slide down against the chair, carelessly, half-lying, 
one leg stretched forward — and with her sternly tailored, transparent 
blouse, her wide peasant skirt hand-printed in violent colors, her 
thin stocking and high-heeled pump, she did not look like a railroad 
executive — the consciousness of it struck her in answer to his eyes 
that seemed to be seeing the unattainable — she looked like that 
which she was: his servant girl. She knew the moment when some 
faintest stress of the brilliance in his dark green eyes removed the 
veil of distance, replacing the vision of the past by the act of seeing 
her immediate person. She met his ey$s with that insolent glance 
which is a smile without movement of facial muscles. 

He turned away, but as he moved across the room his steps were 
as eloquent as the sound of a voice. Slhe knew that he wanted to 
leave the room, as he always left it, he*had never stayed for longer 
than a brief good night when he came home. She watched the course 
of his struggle, whether by means of his steps, begun in one direction 

712 



and swerving in another, or by means of her certainty that her body 
had become an instrument for the direct perception of his, like a 
screen reflecting both movements and motives — she could not tell. 
She knew only that he who had never started or lost a battle against 
himself, now had no power to leave this room. 

His manner seemed to show no sign of strain. He took off his 
coat, throwing it aside, remaining in shirt sleeves, and sat down, 
facing her, at the window across the room. But he sat down on the 
arm of a chair, as if he were neither leaving nor staying. 

She felt the light-headed, the easy, the almost frivolous sensation 
of triumph in the knowledge that she was holding him as surely as 
by a physical touch; for the length of a moment, brief and dangerous 
to endure, it was a more satisfying form of contact. 

Then she felt a sudden, blinding shock, which was half blow, half- 
scream within her, and she groped, stunned, for its cause — only to 
realize that he had leaned a little to one side and it had been no 
more than the sight of an accidental posture, of the long line running 
from his shoulder to the angle of his waist, to his hips, down his 
legs. She looked away, not to let him see that she was trembling — 
and she dropped all thoughts of triumph and of whose was the 
power. 

“I’ve seen you many times since.’* he said, quietly, steadily, but a 
little more slowly than usual, as if he could control everything except 
his need to speak. 

“Where have you seen me?” 

“Many places ” 

“But you made certain to remain unseen?” She knew that his was 
a face she could not have failed to notice. , 

“Yes.” 

“Why? Were you afiaid?" 

“Yes.” 

He said it simply, and it took her a moment to realize that he was 
admitting he knew what the sight ol his person would have meant to 
her. “Did you know who l was, when you saw me for the first time?” 

“Oh yes. My worst enemy but one.” 

“What?” She had not expected it; she added, more quietly. 
“Who’s the worst one?” 

“Dr. Robert Stadler ” 

“Did you have me classified with him?” 

“No. He’s my conscious enemy. He’s the man who sold his soul. 
We don’t intend to reclaim him. You — you were one of us. I knew 
it, long before 1 saw you, I knew also that you would be the last to 
join us and the hardest one to deteat.” 

“Who told you that?” 

“Francisco.” 

She let a moment pass, then asked, “What did he say?” 

“He said that of all the names on our list, you'd be the one most 
difficult to win. That was when I heard of you for the first time. It 
was Francisco who put your name on our list. He told me that you 
were the sole hope and future of Taggart Transcontinental, that 
you’d stand against us for a long time, that you'd fight a desperate 

713 



battle for your railroad — because you had too much endurance, cour- 
age and consecration to your work.” He glanced at her. “He told 
me nothing else. He spoke of you as if he were merely discussing 
one of our future strikers. I knew that you and he had been child- 
hood friends, that was all.” 

“When did you see me?” 

“Two years later,” 

“How?” 

“By chance. It was late at night ... on a passenger platform of 
the Taggart Terminal.” She knew that this was a form of surrender, 
he did not want to say it, yet he had to speak, she heard both the 
muted intensity and the pull of resistance in his voice — he had to 
speak, because he had to give himself and her this one form of 
contact. “You wore an evening gown. You had a cape half-slipping 
off your body — I saw, at first, only your bare shoulders, your back 
and your profile — it looked for a moment as if the cape would slip 
further and you would stand there naked. Then 1 saw that you wore 
a long gown, the color of ice, like the tunic of a Grecian goddess, 
but you had the short hair and the imperious profile of an American 
woman. You looked preposterously out of place on a railroad plat- 
form — and it was not on a railroad platform that 1 was seeing you, 
I was seeing a setting that had never haunted me before — but then, 
suddenly, 1 knew that you did belong among the rails, the soot and 
the girders, that that was the proper setting for a flowing gown and 
naked shoulders and a face as aiive as yours — a railroad platform, 
not a curtained apartment — you looked like a symbol of luxury and 
you belonged in the place that was its source —you seemed to bring 
wealth, grace, extravagance and the enjoyment of life back to their 
rightful owners, to the men who created railroads and factories — 
you had a look of energy and of its reward, together, a look of 
competence and luxury combined — and 1 was the first man who had 
ever stated in what manner these two were inseparable — and 1 
thought that if our age gave form to its proper gods and erected a 
statue to the meaning of an American railroad, yours would be that 
statue. . . . Then I saw what you were doing — and I knew who you 
were. You were giving orders to three Terminal officials. I could not 
hear your words, but your voice sounded swift, clear-cut and confi- 
dent. 1 knew that you were Dagny Taggart. I came closer, close 
enough to hear two sentences. ‘Who said so?' asked one of the men. 
‘I did,’ you answered. That was all I heard. That was enough.” 

“And then?” 

He raised his eyes slowly to hold hers across the room, and the 
submerged intensity that pulled his voice down, blurring its tone to 
softness, gave it a sound of self-mockery that was desperate and 
almost gentle: “Then I knew that abandoning my motor was not the 
hardest price I would have to pay for this strike.” 

She wondered which anonymous shapow — among the passengers 
who had hurried past her, as insubstantial as the steam of the engines 
and as ignored — which shadow and fac<$ had been his; she wondered 
how close she had come to him for the length of that unknown 
moment. “Ob, why didn't you speak to me, then or later?” 

714 



“Do you happen to remember what you were doing in the Termi- 
nal that night?” 

“I remember vaguely a night when they called me from some 
party l was attending. My father was out of town and the new Tcrmi* 
nal manager had made some sort of error that tied up all traffic in the 
tunnels. The old manager had quit unexpectedly the week before.” 

‘it was I who made him quit.” 

“I see . . .” 

Her voice trailed off, as if abandoning sound, as her eyelids 
dropped, abandoning sight. If he had not withstood it then — she 
thought — if he had come to claim her, then or later, what sort of 
tragedy would they have had to reach? . . . She remembered what 
she had felt when she had cried that she would shoot the destroyer 
on sight. . I would have — the thought was not in words, she knew 
it only as a trembling pressure in her stomach —I would have shot 
him, afterward, if I discovered his role . . . and 1 would have had to 
discover it . . . and yet— she shuddered, because she knew she still 
wished he had come to her, because the thought not to be admitted 
into her mind, but flowing as a dark warmth through her body, was: 

1 would have shot him, but not before — 

She raised her eyelids — and she knew that that thought was as 
naked to him in her eyes, as it was to her in his. She saw his veiled 
glance and the tautness of his mouth, she saw him reduced to agony, 
she felt herself drowned by the exultant wish to cause him pain, to 
see it, to watch it, to watch it beyond her own endurance and his, 
then to reduce him to the helplessness oi pleasure. 

He got up, he looked away, and she could not tell whether it was 
the slight lilt of his head or the tension of his features that made his 
face look oddly calm and clear, as if it were stripped of emotion 
down to the naked purity of its structure. 

"Every man that youi railroad needed and lost in the past ten 
years,” he said, “it was l who made you lose him.” His voice had 
the singlctoned Hal ness and the luminous simplicity of an accountant 
who reminds a reckless purchaser that cost is an absolute which 
cannot be escaped, i have pulled cveiy girder from under Taggart 
Transcontinental and, if you choose to go back, I will see it collapse 
upon your head.” 

He turned to leave the room. She stopped him. It was her voice, 
more than her words, that made him stop* her voice was low, it had 
no quality of emotion, only of a sinking weight, and its sole color was 
some dragging undertone, like an inner echo, resembling a threat; it 
was the voice of the pica of a person who still retains a concept of 
honor, but is long past caring for it: 

"You want to hold me here, don't you?” 

“More than anything else in the world.” 

“You could hold me.” 

“I know it.” 

His voice had said it with the same sound as hers. He waited, to 
regain his breath. When he spoke, his voice was low and clear, with 
some stressed quality of awareness, which was almost the quality of 
a smile of understanding: 


715 



“It’s your acceptance of this place that I want, Whatjjood would 
it do me, to have your physical presence without any meaning? 
That’s the kind of faked reality by which most people cheat them- 
selves of their lives. Tm not capable of it.’* He turned to go. “And 
neither are you. Good night, Miss Taggart.” 

He walked out, into his bedroom, closing the door. 

She was past the realm of thought — as she lay in bed in the dark- 
ness of her room, unable to think or to sleep — and the moaning 
violence that filled her mind seemed only a sensation of her muscles, 
but its tone and its twisting shades were like a pleading cry, which 
she knew, not as words, but as pain: Let him come here, let him 
break — let it be damned, all of it, my railroad and his strike and 
everything we’ve lived by! — let it be damned, everything we’ve been 
and are! — he would, if tomorrow 1 were to die — then let me die, but 
tomorrow — let him come here, be it any price he names, I have 
nothing left that’s not for sale to him any longer— is this what it 
means to be an animal? — it does and I am. . . . She lay on her back, 
her palms pressed to the sheet at her sides, to stop herself from 
rising and walking into his room, knowing that she was capable even 
of that. . . . It's not f, it’s a body l can neither endure nor control . . . 
But somewhere within her, not as words, but as a radiant point of 
stillness, there was the presence of the judge who seemed to observe 
her, not in stern condemnation any longer, but in approval and 
amusement, as if saying: Your body? — if he were not what you know 
him to be, would your body bring you to this? — why is it his body 
that you want, and no other? — do you think that you are damning 
them, the things you both have lived by? — are you damning that 
which you are honoring in this very moment, by your very desire? . . . 
She did not have to hear the words, she knew them, she had always 
known them. . . . After a while, she lost the glow of that knowledge, 
and there was nothing left but pain and the palms that were pressed 
to the sheet — and the almost indifferent wonder whether he, too, 
was awake and fighting the same torture. 

She heard no sound in the house and saw no light from his window 
on the tree trunks outside. After a long while she heard, from the 
darkness of bis room, two sounds that gave her a full answer: she knew 
that he was awake and that he Would not come: it was the sound of 
a step and the click of a ctgarelte lighter. 

* * 

Richard Halley stopped playing, turned away from the piano and 
glanced at Dagny. He saw her drop her face with the involuntary 
movement of hiding too strong an emotion, he rose, smiled and said 
softly, “Thank you.’’ 

“Oh no . . .'* she whispered, knowing that the gratitude was heis 
and that it was futile to express it. She was thinking of the years 
when the works he had just played for ijer were being written, here, 
in his small cottage on a ledge of the valley, when all this prodigal 
magnificence of sound was being shaped by him as a flowing menu 
ment to a concept which equates the sdnse of life with the sease of 
beauty — while she had walked through the streets of New York in 
a hopeless quest for some form of enjoyment, with the screeches of 

716 



a modern symphony running after her, as if spit by the infected 
throat of a loud-speaker coughing its malicious hatred of existence. 

“But 1 mean it,” said Richard Halley, smiling. ‘Tm a businessman 
and I never do anything without payment. You’ve paid me. Do you 
see why 1 wanted to play for you tonight?” 

She raised her head. He stood in the middle of his living room, 
they were alone, with the window open to the summer night, to the 
dark trees on a long sweep of ledges descending toward the glitter 
of the valley’s distant lights. 

“Miss Taggart, how many people are there to whom my work 
means as much as it does to you?” 

“Not many.” she answered simply, neither as boast nor flattery, 
hut as an impersonal tribute to the exacting values involved. 

“That is the payment I demand. Not many can afford it. 1 don’t 
mean your enjoyment, I don’t mean your emotion — emotions be 
damned’- mean your understanding and the fact that your enjoy- 
ment was ot the same nature as mine, that it came from the same 
souice: from your intelligence, from the conscious judgment of a 
mind able to judge my work by the standard of the same values that 
went to write it — 1 mean, not the fact that you felt, but that you felt 
what / wished you to feel, not the fact that you admire my work, 
but that you admire it for the things / wished to be admired.” He 
chuckled. “There's only one passion in most artists more violent than 
their desire lot admiration: their fear ot identifying the nature of 
such admiration as they do receive. But it's a fear I’ve never shared. 

I do not tool myself about my work or the response I seek — 1 value 
both too highly. I do not care to be admired causelessly, emotionally, 
intuitively, instinctively —or blindly. I do not care for blindness in 
any form, 1 have too much to show— or for deafness, I have too 
much to say. I do not care to be admired by anyone’s heart — only 
bv someone’s head . And when 1 find a customer with that invaluable 
capacity, ihen my performance is a mutual trade to mutual profit. 
An artist is a trader. Miss Taggart, the hardest and most exacting of 
all traders. Now do you understand me?” 

“Yes,” she said incredulously, “1 do,” incredulously because she 
was hearing her own symbol of moral pride, chosen by a man she 
had least expected to choose it. 

“If you do. why did you look quite so tragic just a moment ago? 
What is it that you regret ?” 

“The years when your work has remained unheard.” 

“But it hasn’t. I’ve given two or three concerts every year. Here, 
in Galt's Gulch. I am giving one next week. I hope you'll come. The 
price of admission is twenty-live cents.” 

She could not help laughing. He smiled, then his face slipped 
slowly into earnestness, as under the tide of some unspoken contem- 
plation of his own. He looked at the darkness beyond the window, 
at a spot where, in a clearing of the branches, with the moonlight 
draining its color, leaving only its metallic luster, the sign of the 
dollar hung like a curve of shining steel engraved on the sky, 

“Miss Taggart, do you see why I’d give three dozen modem artists 
for one real businessman? Why I have much more in common with 

717 



Ellis Wyatt or Ken Da nagger — who happens to be tone deaf— -than 
with men like Mort Liddy and Balph Eubank? Whether it’s a sym- 
phony or a coal mine, all work is an act of creating and comes from 
the same source: from an inviolate capacity to see through one’s own 
eyes — which means: the capacity to perform a rational identifica- 
tion — which means: the capacity to see, to connect and to make what 
had not been seen, connected and made before. Thai shining vision 
which they talk about as belonging to the authors of symphonies and 
novels — what do they think is the driving faculty of men who discov- 
ered how to use oil, how to run a mine, how to build an electric 
motor? That sacred fire which is said to bum within musicians and 
poets — what do they suppose moves an industrialist to defy the 
whole world for the sake of his new metal, as the inventors of the 
airplane, the builders ot the railroads, the discoverers of new germs 
or new continents have done through all the ages? ... An intransi- 
gent devotion to the pursuit of ttuth, Miss Taggart? Have you heard 
the moralists and the art lovers of the centuries talk about the artist’s 
intransigent devotion to the pursuit of truth? Name me a greater 
example of such devotion than the act of a man who says that the 
earth does turn, or the act of a man who says that an alloy of steel 
and copper has certain properties which enable it to do certain 
things, and it is and does — and let the world rack him or ruin him. 
he will not bear false witness to the evidence ot his mind’ This, Miss 
Taggart, this sort of spirit, courage and love for truth — as against a 
sloppy bum who goes around proudly assuring you that he has almost 
reached the perfection of a lunatic, because he’s an artist who hasn’t 
the faintest idea what his art work is or means, he's not restrained 
by such crude concepts as ‘being’ or ‘meaning,’ he's the vehicle ol 
higher mysteries, he doesn’t know how he created his work or whv, 
it just came out of him spontaneously, like vomit out of a drunkard, 
he did not think, he wouldn’t stoop to thinking, he just fell it, all he 
has to do is feel — be feels , the flabby, loose -mouthed, shifty -eyed, 
drooling, shivering, uncongealed bastard! I, who know what disci- 
pline, what effort, what tension of mind, what unrelenting strain 
upon one’s power of clarity are needed to produce a work of art-- 
I, who know that it requires a labor which makes a chain gang look 
like rest and a severity no army-drilling sadist could impose — I’ll 
take the operator of a coal mine over any walking vehicle of higher 
mysteries. The operator knows that it’s not his feelings that keep the 
coal carts moving under the earth — and he knows what does keep 
them moving. Feelings? Oh yes, we do feel, he, you and 1 — we are, 
in fact, the only people capable of feeling — and we know where our 
feelings come from. But what we did not know and have delayed 
learning for loo long is the nature qjf those who claim that the\ 
cannot account for their feelings. We * did not know what it is that 
they feel. We are learning it now. It ^as a costly error. And those 
most guilty of it, will pay the hardest f|rice — as, in justice, they must. 
Those most guilty of it were the real ^artists, who will now see that 
they are first to be exterminated an<J that they had prepared, the 
triumph of their own exterminators by helping to destroy their only 
protectors. For if there is more tragic a fool than the businessman 

718 



who doesn’t know that he’s an exponent of man’s highest creative 
spirit — it’s the artist who thinks that the businessman is his enemy.” 

It was true — she thought, when she walked through the streets of 
the valley, looking with a child’s excitement at the shop windows 
sparkling in the sun — that the businesses here had the purposeful 
selectiveness ot art — and that the art — she thought, when she sat in 
the darkness of a clapboard concert hall, listening to the controlled 
violence and the mathematical precision of Halley’s music— had the 
stern discipline of business. 

Both had the radiance of engineering -she thought, when she sat 
among rows of benches under the open sky, watching Kay Ludlow 
on the stage. It was an experience she had not known since child- 
hood— the experience of being held for three hours by a play that 
told a story she had not seen before, in lines she had not heard, 
uttering a theme that had not been picked from the hand-me-downs 
of the centuries. It was the forgotten delight of being held in rapt 
attention by the rents of the ingenious, the unexpected, the logical, 
the purposeful, the new -and of seeing it embodied in a performance 
of superlative artistry by a woman playing a character whose beauty 
of spirit matched her own physical perfection. 

“That's why I’m here. Miss Taggart,” said Kay Ludlow, smiling in 
answer to her comment, alter the performance. “Whatever quality 
ol human greatness 1 have the talent to portray — that was the quality 
the outer world sought to degrade. They let me play nothing but 
symbols of depravity, nothing but harlots, dissipation-chasers and 
home-wreckers, always to be beaten at the end by the little girl next 
door, personifying the virtue of mediocrity. They used my talent — 
lor the defamation of itself. That was why I quit.” 

Not since childhood, thought Dagny, had she felt that sense of 
exhilaiatiun after witnessing the performance of a play— the sense 
that life held things worth reaching, not the sense of having studied 
some aspect of a sewer there had been no reason to see. As the 
audience tiled away into the darkness from the lighted rows of 
benches, she noticed Ellis Wyatt, Judge Narragansett, Ken Danagger, 
men who had once been said to despise all forms of art. 

The last image she caught, that evening, was the sight of two tall, 
straight, slender figures walking away together down a Hail among 
the rocks, with the beam of a spotlight gashing once on the gold of 
their hair. They were Kay Ludlow and Ragnar Danneskjdld— and 
she wondered whether she could bear to return to a world where 
these were the two doomed to destruction. 

The recaptured sense of her own childhood kept coming back to 
her whenever she met the two sons of the young woman who owned 
the bakery shop. She often saw them wandeiing down the trails of 
the valley — two fearless beings, aged seven and four. They seemed 
to lace life as she had laced it. They did not have the look she had 
seen m the children of the outer world — a look of fear, half-secretive, 
half-sneering, the look of a child’s defense against an adult, the look 
of a being in the process of discovering that he is hearing lies and of 
learning to feel hatred. The two boys had the open, joyous, friendly 
confidence of kittens who do not expect to get hurt, they had an 

719 



innocently natural, non-ooastrut sense or tneir own varne ana as in- 
nocent a trust in any stranger’s ability to recognize it, they had the 
eager curiosity that would venture anywhere with the certainty that 
life held nothing unworthy of or closed to discovery, and they looked 
as if, should they encounter malevolence, they would reject it con- 
temptuously, not as dangerous,, but as stupid, they would not accept 
it in bruised resignation as the law of existence. 

“They represent my particular career. Miss Taggart,” said the 
young mother in answer to her comment, wrapping a loaf of fresh 
bread and smiling at her across the counter. “They’re the profession 
I’ve chosen to practice, which, in spite ot all the guff about mother- 
hood, one can’t practice successfully in the outer world. I believe 
you’ve met my husband, he's the teacher of economics who works 
as linesman for Dick McNamara. You know, of course, that there 
can be no collective commitments in this valley and that families or 
relatives are not allowed to come here, unless each person takes the 
striker’s oath by his own independent conviction. 1 came here, not 
merely for the sake of my husband’s profession, but for the sake of 
my own. I came here in order to bring up my sons as human beings. 
I would not surrender them to the educational systems devised to 
stunt a child’s brain, to convince him that reason is impotent, that 
existence is an irrational chaos with which he’s unable to deal, and 
thus reduce him to a state of chronic terror. You marvel at the 
difference between my children and those outside. Miss Taggart? 
Yet the cause is so simple. The cause is that here, in Galt’s Gulch, 
there’s no person who would not consider it monstrous ever to con- 
front a child with the slightest suggestion of the irrational.” 

She thought of the teachers whom the schools of the world had 
lost — when she looked at the three pupils of Dr, Akston, on the 
evening of their yearly reunion. 

The only other guest he had invited was Kay Ludlow. The six of 
them sal in the back yard of his house, with the light of the sunset 
on their faces, and the floor of the valley condensing into a soft blue 
vapor far below. 

She looked at his pupils, at the three pliant, agile figures half- 
stretched on canvas chairs in poses of relaxed contentment, dressed 
in slacks, windbreakers and open-collared shirts: John Galt, Fran- 
cisco d’Anconia, Ragnar DanneskjOld. 

“Don’t be astonished, Miss Taggart,” said Dr. Akston, smiling, 
“and don’t make the mistake of thinking that these three pupils of 
mine are some sort of superhuman creatures. They’re something 
much greater and more astounding thaq that: they’re normal men — 
a thing the world has never seen — and tljjeir feat is that they managed 
to survive as such, it does take an exceptional mind and a still more 
exceptional integrity to remain untoueped by the brain-destroying 
influences of the world's doctrines, thd accumulated evil of centu- 
ries — to remain human , since the humajjn is the rational.” 

She felt some new quality in Dr. Alton’s attitude, some change 
in the sternness of his usual reserve; he seemed to include her in 
their circle, as if she were more than a guest. Francisco acted as if 
her presence at their reunion were natural and to be taken gaily for 

720 



granted. Galt’s face gave no hint of any reaction; his manner was 
that of a courteous escort who had brought her here at Dr. Aks- 
ton’s request. 

She noticed that Dr. Akston’s eyes kept coming back to her, as if 
with the quiet pride of displaying his students to an appreciative 
observer. His conversation kept returning to a single theme, in the 
manner of a father who has found a listener interested in his most 
cherished subject: 

“You should have seen them, when they were in college. Miss 
Taggart. You couldn’t have found three boys ‘conditioned’ to such 
different backgrounds, but— conditioners be damned! — they must 
have picked one another at first sight, among the thousands on that 
campus. Francisco, the richest heir in the world — Ragnar, the Euro- 
pean aristocrat— and John, the self-made man, self-made in every 
sense, out of nowhere, penniless, parentless, tie-less. Actually, he was 
the son of a gas-station mechanic at some forsaken crossroads in 
Ohio, and he had left home at the age of twelve to make his own 
way — but I’ve always thought of him as if he had come into the 
world like Minerva, the goddess of wisdom, who sprang forth from 
Jupiter’s head, fully grown and fully armed. . . . I remember the day 
when I saw the three of them for the first time. They were sitting 
at the back of the classroom — 1 was giving a special course for post- 
graduate students, so difficult a course that few outsiders ever ven- 
tured to attend these particular lectures. Those three looked too 
young even for freshmen —they were sixteen at the time, as f learned 
later. At the end of that lecture, John got up to ask me a question. 
It was a question which, as a teacher, 1 would have been proud to 
hear from a student who’d taken six years of philosophy. It was a 
question pertaining to Plato’s metaphysics, which Plato hadn’t had 
the sense to ask of himself. I answeied— and I asked John to come 
to my office after the lecture. He came — all three of them came — I 
saw the two others in my anteroom and let them in. I talked to them 
for an hour — then I cancelled all my appointments and talked to 
them for the rest of the day. Alter which, I arranged to let them 
take that course and receive their credits for it. They took the course. 
Fhey got the highest grades in the class. . . .They were majoring in 
two subjects: physics and philosophy. Their choice amazed everybody 
but me: modem thinkers considered it unnecessary to perceive real- 
ity, and modern physicists considered it unnecessary to think. I knew 
better; what amazed me was that these children knew it, too. . . . 
Robert Stadler was head of the Department of Physics, as l was 
head of the Department of Philosophy. He and 1 suspended all rules 
and restrictions for these three students, we spared them all the 
routine, unessential courses, we loaded them with nothing but the 
hardest tasks, and wc cleared their way to major in our two subjects 
within their four years. They worked for it. And, during those four 
years, they worked for their living, besides. Francisco and Ragnar 
were receiving allowances from their parents, John had nothing, but 
all three of them held part-time jobs to cam their own experience 
and money, Francisco worked in a copper foundry, John worked in 
a railroad roundhouse, and Ragnar — no. Miss Taggart, Ragnar was 

721 



not the least, but the most studiously sedate of the three — he worked 
as clerk in the university library. They had time for everything they 
wanted, but no time for people or for any communal campus activi- 
ties. They . . . Ragnar!” he interrupted himself suddenly, sharply. 
“Don’t sit on the ground!” 

Danneskjbld had slipped down and was now sitting on the grass, 
with his head leaning against Kay Ludlow’s knees. He rose obedi- 
ently, chuckling. Dr. Akston smiled with a touch of apology. 

'it’s an old habit of mine,” he explained to Dagny. “A ‘condi- 
tioned’ reflex, I guess. I used to tell him that in those college years, 
when Fd catch him sitting on the ground in my back yard, on cold, 
foggy evenings — he was reckless that way, he made me worry, he 
should have known it was dangerous and — ” 

He stopped abruptly; he read in Dagny’s startled eyes the same 
thought as his own: the thought of the kind of dangers the adult 
Ragnar had chosen to face. Dr. Akston shrugged, spreading his 
hands in a gesture of helpless self-mockery. Kay Ludlow smiled at 
him in understanding. 

”My house stood just outside the campus,” he continued, sighing, 
“on a tall bluff over Lake Erie. Wc spent many evenings together, 
the four of us. We would sit just like this, in my back yard, on 
the nights of early fall or in the spring, only instead of this granite 
mountainside, we had the spread of the lake before us, stretching 
off into a peacefully unlimited distance. I had to work harder on 
those nights than in any classroom, answering all the questions they'd 
ask me, discussing the kind of issues they’d raise. About midnight, 
I would fix some hot chocolate and force them to drink it — the one 
thing I suspected was that they never took time to eat properly — 
and then we’d go on talking, while the lake vanished into solid dark- 
ness and the sky seemed lighter than the earth. There were a tew 
times when we stayed there till I noticed suddenly that the sky was 
turning darker and the lake was growing pale and we were within a 
few sentences of daylight. I should have known better, 1 knew that 
they weren’t getting enough sleep as it was, but I forgot it occasion- 
ally, 1 lost my sense of time — you see, when they were there, I always 
felt as if it were early morning and a long, inexhaustible day were 
stretching ahead before us. They never spoke of what they wished 
they might do in the future, they never wondered whether some 
mysterious omnipotence had favored them with some unknowable 
talent to achieve the things they wanted — they spoke of what they 
would do. Does affection tend to make one a coward? I know that 
the only times I felt fear were occasional moments when 1 listened 
to them and thought of what the world was becoming and what they 
would have to encounter in the future; Fear? Yes - but it was more 
than fear. It was the kind of emotion 2 that makes men capable ol 
killing — when 1 thought that the purpose of the world’s trend was 
to destroy these children, that these th^ee sons of mine were marked 
for immolation. Oh yes, I would navef killed — but whom was there 
to kill? It was everyone and no one, tjtere was no single enemy* no 
center and no villain, it was not the simpering social worker incapa- 
ble of earning a penny or the thieving bureaucrat scared of his own 

122 



shadow, it was the whole of the earth rolling into an obscenity of 
horror, pushed by the hand of every would-be decent man who be- 
lieved that need is holier than ability, and pity is holier than justice. 
But these were only occasional moments. It was not my constant 
feeling. I listened to my children and l knew that nothing would 
defeat them. I looked at them, as they sat in my back yard, and 
beyond my house there were the tall, dark buildings of what was 
still a monument to unenslaved thought— the Patrick Henry Univer- 
sity — and farther in the distance there were the lights of Cleveland, 
the orange glow of steel mills behind batteries of smokestacks, the 
twinkling red dots of radio towers, the long white rays of airports 
on the black edge of the sky — and I thought that in the name of any 
greatness that had ever existed and moved this world, the greatness 
of which they were the last descendants, they would win. ... I 
remember one night when 1 noticed that John had been silent for a 
long time — and I saw that he had fallen asleep, stretched there on 
the ground. The two others confessed that he had not slept for three 
days. I sent the two of them home at once, but I didn’t have the 
heart to disturb him. It was a warm spring night, I brought a blanket 
to cover him, and I let him sleep where he was. I sat there beside 
hitn till morning— -and as I watched his face in the starlight, then the 
first ray of the sun on his untroubled forehead and closed eyelids, 
what I experienced was not a prayer, 1 do not pray, but that state 
of spirit at which a prayer is a misguided attempt: a full, confident, 
affirming self-dedication to my love of the right, to the certainty that 
the right would win and that this boy would have the kind of future 
he deserved.'’ He moved his arm. pointing to the valley, “1 did not 
expect it to be as great as this— or as hard.” 

It had grown dark and the mountains had blended with the sky. 
Hanging detached in space, there were the lights of the valley below 
them, the red breath of Stockton’s foundry above, and the lighted 
string of windows of Mulligan’s house, like a railroad car imbedded 
in the sky 

i did have a rival.” said Dr. Akston slowly. “‘It was Robert Stadler 

Don’t frown, John — it’s past. . . . John did love him, once. Well, so 
did 1 — no, not quite, but what one tell for a mind like Stadler’s was 
painfully close to love, it was that rarest of pleasures: admiration. 
No, I did not love him, but he and I had always felt as if we were 
fellow survivors from some vanishing age or land, in the gibbering 
swamp of mediocrity around us. The mortal sin of Robert Stadler 
was that he never identified his proper homeland. ... He hated 
stupidity. It was the only emotion l had ever seen him display toward 
people — a biting, bitter, weary hatred for any ineptitude that dared 
to oppose him. He wanted his own way, he wanted to be left alone 
to pursue it, he wanted to brush people out of his path — and he 
never identified the means to it or the nature of his path and of his 
enemies. He took a short cut. Are you smiling. Miss Taggart? You 
hate him, don’t you? Yes, you know the kind of short cut he took. . . , 
He told you that we were rivals for these three students. That was 
true — or rather, that was not the way I thought of it, but I knew 
that he did. Well, if we were rivals, I had one advantage: 1 knew 

723 



why they needed both our professions; he never understood their 
interest in mine. He never understood its importance to himself — 
which, incidentally, is what destroyed him. But in those years he was 
still alive enough to grasp at these three students. ‘Grasp’ was the 
word for it. Intelligence being the only value he worshipped, he 
clutched them as if they were a private treasure of his own. He had 
always been a very lonely man. I think that in the whole of his life, 
Francisco and Ragnar were his only love, and John was his only 
passion. It was John whom he regarded as his particular heir, as his 
future, as his own immortality. John intended to be an inventor, 
which meant that he was to be a physicist; he was to take his post- 
graduate course under Robert Stadier. Francisco intended to leave 
after graduation and go to work; he was to be the perfect blend of 
both of us, his two intellectual fathers: an industrialist. And Ragnar — 
you didn’t know what profession Ragnar had chosen. Miss Taggart? 
No, it wasn't stunt pilot, or jungle explorer, or deep-sea diver. It was 
something much more courageous than these. Ragnar intended to 
be a philosopher. An abstract, theoretical, academic, cloistered, 
ivory-tower philosopher. . . . Yes, Robert Stadlcr loved them. And 
yet — I have said that 1 would have killed to protect them, only there 
was no one to kill. If that were the solution — which, of course, it 
isn’t — the man to kill was Robert Stadier. Of any one person, of any 
single guilt for the evil which is now destroying the world — his was 
the heaviest guilt He had the mind to know better. His was the only 
name of honor and achievement, used to sanction the rule of the 
looters. He was the man who delivered science into the power ol 
the looters' guns. John did not expect it. Neither did l. . . . John 
came back for his postgraduate course in physics. But he did not 
finish it. He left, on the day when Robert Stadier endorsed the estab- 
lishment of a State Science Institute. I met Stadlcr by chance in a 
corridor of the university, as he came out of his office after his last 
conversation with John, lie looked changed. I hope that I shall never 
have to see again a change of that kind in a man’s face. He saw me 
approaching— -and he did not know, but I knew, what made him 
whirl upon me and cry, ‘I’m so sick of all of you impractical idealists! ' 
I turned away. I knew that I had heard a man pronounce a death 
sentence upon himself. . . . Miss Taggart, do you remember the 
question you asked me about my three pupils?” 

“Yes,” she whispered. 

“I could gather, from your question, the nature of what Robert 
Stadier had said to you about them. Tell me, why did he speak of 
them at all?” 

He saw the faint movement of her better smile. “He told me their 
story as a justification for his belief iri the futility of human intelli- 
gence. He told it to me as an example of his disillusioned hope. 
‘Theirs was the kind of ability,’ he sa|d, ‘one expects to see, in the 
future, changing the course of the wofld.' ” 

“Well, haven’t they done so?” 

She nodded, slowly, holding her hesfd inclined for a long moment 
in acquiescence and in homage. 

“What I want you to understand. Miss Taggart, is the full evil of 

724 



those who claim to have become convinced that this earth, by its 
nature, is a realm of malevolence where the good has no chance to 
win. Let them check their premises. Let them check their standards 
of value. Let them check — before they grant themselves the unspeak- 
able license of cvil-as-necesstty — whether they know what is the 
good and what are the conditions it requires. Robert Stadler now 
believes that intelligence is futile and that human life can be nothing 
but irrational. Did he expect John Galt to become a great scientist, 
willing to work under the orders of Dr. Floyd Feriis? Did he expect 
Francisco d’Anconia to become a great industrialist, willing to pro- 
duce under the orders and for the benefit of Wesley Mouch? Did he 
expect Ragnar Darmeskjold to become a great philosopher, willing to 
preach, under the orders of Dr. Simon Pritchett, that there is no 
mind and that might is right? Would that have been a future which 
Robert Stadler would have considered rational 7 I want you to ob- 
serve, Miss Taggart, that those who cry the loudest about their disil- 
lusionment, about the failure of virtue, the futility of reason, the 
impotence of logic— are those who have achieved the full, exact, 
logical result of the ideas they preached, so mercilessly logical that 
they dare not identify it. In a world that proclaims the non-existence 
of the mind, the moral righteousness of rule by brute force, the 
penalizing of the competent in favor of the incompetent, the sacrifice 
of the best to the worst- -in such a world, the best have to turn 
against society and have to become its deadliest enemies. In such a 
world John Galt, the man of incalculable intellectual power, will 
remain an unskilled laborer-— Francisco d’Anconia, the miraculous 
producer of wealth, will become a wastiel— and Ragnar Danncskjdld, 
the man of enlightenment, will become the man of violence. Soci- 
ety — and Dr Robert Stadler — have achieved everything they advo- 
cated. What complaint do they now have to make? That the universe 
is irrational? Is it?” 

He smiled; his smile had the pitiless gentleness of certainty 

“Every man builds his world in his own image,” he said. “He has 
the power to choose, but no power to escape the necessity of choice. 
If he abdicates his power, he abdicates the status of man, and the 
grinding chaos of the irrational is what he achieves as his sphere ot 
existence — by his own choice. Whoever preserves a single thought 
uncorrupted by any concession to the will of others, whoever brings 
into reality a r.ialehslick or a patch of garden made in the image of 
his thought— he, and to that extent, is a man and that extent is the 
sole measure of his virtue. They” — he pointed at his pupils — “made 
no concessions. This”— he pointed at the valley “is the measure of 
what they preserved and of what they are. . . . Now I can repeat my 
answer to the question you asked me, knowing that you will under- 
stand it fully. You asked me whether 1 was proud of the way my 
three sons had turned out. 1 am more proud than I had ever hoped 
In be. I am proud of their every action, of their every goal — and of 
every value they’ve chosen. And thus, Dagny, is my full answer.” 

The sudden sound of her first name was pronounced in the tone 
°f a father; he spoke his last two sentences, looking, not at her, but 
at Galt. She saw Galt answering him by an open glance held steady 

725 



for an instant, like a signal of affirmation. Then Galt’s eyes moved 
to hers. She saw him looking at her as if she bore the unspoken title 
that hung in the silence between them, the title Dr. Akstbn had 
granted her, but had not pronounced and none of the others had 
caught — she saw, in Galt’s eyes, a glance of amusement at her shock, 
of support and, incredibly, of tenderness. 

* * 

D’Anconia Copper No. 1 was a small cut on the face of the moun- 
tain, that looked as if a knife had made a tew angular slashes, leaving 
shelves of rock, red as a wound, on the reddish-brown flank. The 
sun beat down upon it. Dagny stood at the edge ot a path, holding 
on to Galt's arm on one side and to Francisco's on the other, the 
wind blowing against their faces and out over the valley, two thou- 
sand feet below. 

This —she thought, looking at the mine — was the story of human 
wealth written across the mountains: a tew pine trees hung over the 
cut, contorted by the storms that had raged through the wilderness 
for centuries, six men worked on the shelves, and an inordinate 
amount of complex machinery traced delicate lines against the sky; 
the machinery did most of the work. 

She noticed that Francisco was displaying his domain to Galt as 
much as to her, as much or more. “You haven't seen it since last 
year, John. . . . John, wait till you see it a year from now. FI! be 
through, outside, in just a few months -and then this will be my full- 
time job.” 

“Hell, no. John!” he said, laughing, in answer to a question— but 
she caught suddenly the particular quality of his glance whenever it 
rested on Galt: it was the quality she had seen in his eyes when he 
had stood in her room, clutching the edge of a table to outlive an 
unlivable moment; he had looked as it he were seeing someone be- 
fore him; it was Galt, she thought; it was Galt's image that had 
carried him through. 

Some part of her felt a dim dread: the effort which Francisco had 
made in that moment to accept her loss and his rival, as the payment 
demanded of him tor his battle, had cost him so much that he was 
now unable to suspect the truth Dr. Akslon had guessed. What will 
it do to him when he learns? — she wondered, and felt a bitter voice 
reminding her that there would, perhaps, never be any truth of this 
kind to learn. 

Some part of her felt a dim tension as she watched the way Gall 
looked at Francisco: it was an open, simple, unreserved glance ot 
surrender to an unreserved feeling. .She felt the anxious wonder she 
had never fully named or dismissed? wonder whether this feeling 
would bring him down to the uglinesfc of renunciation. 

But most of her mind seemed swept by some enormous sense ot 
release, as if she were laughing at alb doubts. Her glance kept going 
back over the path they had traveled to get here, over the two ex- 
hausting miles of a twisted trail that rfcn, like a precarious corkscrew, 
from the tip of her feet down to th* floor of the valley. Her eyes 
kept studying it, her mind racing with some purpose of its own. 

Brush, pines and a clinging carpet df moss went climbing from the 

726 



green slopes far below, up the granite ledges. The moss and the 
brush vanished gradually, but the pines went on, struggling upward 
in thinning strands, till only a few dots of single trees were left, rising 
up the naked rock toward the white sunbursts oi snow in the crevices 
at the peaks. She looked at the spectacle of the most ingenious min- 
ing machinery she had ever seen, then at the trail where the plodding 
hoots and swaying shapes of mules provided the most ancient form 
of transportation. 

“Francisco,’' she asked, pointing, “who designed the machines?” 

“They're just adaptations of standard equipment.” 

“Who designed them‘ > ” 

i did. We don’t have many men to spare. We had to make up 
for it.” 

“You're wasting an unconscionable amount of manpower and 
time, carting your ore on muleback. You ought to build a railroad 
down to the valley ” 

She was looking down and did not notice the sudden, eager shot 
oi his glance to her face or the sound oi caution m his voice: ‘i 
know it, but it’s such a difficult job that the mine’s output won’t 
justify it at present ” 

“Nonsense! It’s much simpler than it looks. There’s a pass to the 
east where there’s an easier grade and softer stone. I watched it on 
the way up, it wouldn’t take so many curves, three miles of rail or 
less would do it.” 

She was pointing east, she did not notice the intensity with which 
the two men were watching her face. 

“Just a nai row-gauge track is all you’ll need . . like the first 
railroads . . . that’s where the first railroads started — at mines, only 
they were coal mines. . Look, do you see that ridge? There’s 
plenty of clearance for a three-loot gauge, you wouldn’t need to do 
any blasting or widening. Do you see where there’s a slow rise for 
a stretch of almost half a mile? That would be no worse than a four 
per cent grade, any engine could manage it." She was speaking with 
a swift, bright certainty, conscious of nothing but the joy of per* 
torming her natural function in her natural world where nothing 
could take precedence over the act of offering a solution to a prob- 
lem. “The road will pay for itself within three years. I think, at a 
rough glance, that the costliest part of the job will be a couple of 
steel trestles — and there’s one spot where I might have to blast a 
tunnel, but it’s only for a hundred feet or less. I'll need a steel trestle 
to throw the track across that gorge and bring it here, but it’s not as* 
hard as it looks— let me show you, have you got a piece of paper?" 

She did not notice with what speed Galt produced a notebook and 
a pencil and thrust them into her hands— she seized them, as if she 
expected them to be there, as if she were giving orders on a construc- 
tion site where details of this kind were not to delay her. 

“Let me give you a rough idea of what I mean. If we drive diago- 
nal piles into the rock" — she was sketching rapidly — “the actual steel 
span would be only six hundred feet long— it would cut off this last 
half-mile of your corkscrew turns — I could have the rail laid in three 
months and—" 


111 



She stopped. When she looked up at their faces, the "fire had gone 
out of hers. She crumpled her sketch and flung it aside into the red 
dust of the gravel. “Oh, what for?” she cried, the despair breaking 
out for the first time. ‘To build three miles of railroad and abandon 
a transcontinental system!” 

The two men were looking at her, she saw no reproach in their 
faces, only a look of understanding which was almost compassion. 

“I’m sorry,” she said quietly, dropping her eyes. 

“If you change your mind,” said Francisco, ‘Til hire you on the 
spot — or Midas will give you a loan in five minutes to finance that 
railroad, if you want to own it yourself.” 

She shook her head. “I can't . . .” she whispered, “not yet . . .” 

She raised her eyes, knowing that they knew the nature of her 
despair and that it was useless to hide her struggle. ‘Tve tried it 
once,” she said. “I’ve tried to give it up ... I know what it will 
mean . . . I'll think of it with every crosstie I’ll see laid here, with 
every spike driven . . . 1*11 think of that other tunnel and . . . and of 
Nat Taggart’s bridge. . . . Oh, if only 1 didn’t have to hear about it! 
If only I could stay here and never know what they’re doing to the 
railroad, and never learn when it goes!” 

“You’ll have to hear about it, 5 ” said Galt; it was that ruthless tone, 
peculiarly his, which sounded implacable by being simple, devoid of 
any emotional value, save the quality of respect for facts. “You’ll 
hear the whole course of the last agony of Taggart Transcontinental. 
You’ll hear about every wreck. You’ll hear about every discontinued 
train. You’ll hear about every abandoned line. You’ll hear about the 
collapse of the Taggart Bridge. Nobody stays in this valley excepi 
by a full, conscious choice based on a full, conscious knowledge of 
every fact involved in his decision. Nobody stays here by faking 
reality in any manner whatever.” 

She looked at him, her head lifted, knowing what chance he was 
rejecting. She thought that no man of the outer world would have 
said this to her at this moment — she thought of the world's code 
that worshipped white lies as an act of mercy — she felt a stab of a 
revulsion against that code, suddenly seeing its full ugliness for the 
first time — she felt an enormous pride for the tight, clean face of the 
man before her — he saw the shape of her mouth drawn firm in self- 
control, yet softened by some tremulous emotion, while she answered 
quietly, “Thank you. You're right.” 

“You don’t have to answer me now,” he said. “You'll tell me 
twhen you’ve decided. There’s still a week left.” 

“Yes,” she said calmly, “just one more week.” 

He turned, picked up her crumpled vsketch, folded it neatly and 
slipped it into his pocket. } 

“Dagny,” said Francisco, “when you ieigh your decision, consider 
the first time you quit, if you wish, but Consider everything about it. 
In this valley, you won’t have to torture yourself by shingling roofs 
and building paths that lead nowhere.’! 

“Tell me,” she asked suddenly, “how did you find out where I 
was, that time?” * 

He smiled, “It was John who told me. The destroyer, remember? 

728 



You wondered why the destroyer had not sent anyone after you. 
But he had. It was he who sent me there.” 

“He sent you?” 

“Yes.” 

“What did he say to you?” 

“Nothing much. Why?” 

“What did he say? Do you remember the exact words?” 

“Yes, I do remember. He said, if you want your chance, take it. 
You’ve earned it.’ I remember, because — ” He turned to Galt with 
the untroubled frown of a slight, casual puzzle. “John, 1 never quite 
understood why you said it. Why that? Why — my chance?” 

“Do you mind if 1 don’t answer you now?” 

“No, but — ” 

Someone hailed him from the ledges of the mine, and he went off 
swiftly, as if the subject required no further attention. 

She was conscious of the long span of moments she took while 
turning her head to Galt. She knew that she would find him looking 
at her. She could read nothing in his eyes, except a hint of derision, 
as if he knew what answer she was seeking and that she would not 
find it in his face. 

“You gave him a chance that you wanted?” 

“I could have no chance till he'd had every chance possible to 
him.” 

“How did you know what he had earned?” 

“I had been questioning him about you for ten years, every time 
1 could, m every way, from every angle. No, he did not tell me— it 
svas the way he spoke of you that did. He didn't want to speak, but 
he spoke loo eagerly, eagerly and reluctantly together — and then I 
knew that it had not been just a childhood friendship. I knew' how 
much he had given up lor the strike and how desperately he hoped 
he hadn’t given it up forever. I? I was merely questioning him about 
one of our most important future strikers— as 1 questioned him about 
many others.” 

The hint of derision remained in his eyes; he knew that she had 
wanted to hear this, but that this was not the answer to the one 
question she feared. 

She looked from his face to Francisco’s approaching figure, not 
hiding from herself any longer that her sudden, heavy, desolate anxi- 
ety was the fear that Galt might throw' the three of them into the 
hopeless waste of self-sacrifice. 

Francisco approached, looking at her thoughtfully, as if weighing 
some question of his own, but some question that gave a sparkle of 
reckless gaiety to his eyes. 

“Dagny, there’s only one week left,” he said. “If you decide to 
go back, it will be the last, for a long time.” There was no reproach 
and no sadness in his voice, only some softened quality as sole evi* 
dencc of emotion. “If you leave now — oh yes, you’ll still come 
back — but it won’t be soon. And I — in a few months, I’ll come to 
live here permanently, so if you go, l won’t see you again, perhaps 
for years. I’d like you to spend this last week with me. I’d like you 

729 



to move to my house. As my guest, nothing else, for no reason, 
except that I'd like you to." 

He said it simply, as if nothing were or could be hidden among 
the three of them. She saw no sign of astonishment in Galt’s face. 
She felt some swift tightening in her chest, something hard, reckless 
and almost vicious that had the quality of a dark excitement driving 
her blindly into action. 

“But I'm an employee," she said, with an odd smile, looking at 
Galt, “I have a job to finish." 

“I won't hold you to it," said Galt, and she felt anger at the 
tone oi his voice, a tone that granted her no hidden significance and 
answered nothing but the literal meaning of her words. “You can 
quit the job any time you wish. It’s up to you " 

“No, it isn't. I’m a prisoner here. Don’t you remember 0 I'm to 
take orders. I have no preferences to follow, no wishes to express, 
no decisions to make. I want the decision to be yours.” 

“You want it to be mine?" 

“Yes!” 

“You’ve expressed a wish." 

The mockery of his voice was in its seriousness — and she threw at 
him defiantly, not smiling, as if daring him to continue pretending 
that he did not understand “All right That's what I wish!" 

He smiled, as at a child’s complex scheming which he had long 
since seen through. “Very well." But he did not smile, as he said, 
turning to Francisco, “Then —no." 

The defiance toward an adversary who was the sternest ot teach- 
ers, was all that Francisco had read in her face. He shrugged, regret 
fully, but gaily. “You're probably right. If you can’t prevent her Irorn 
going back -nobody can." 

She was not hearing Francisco's words. She was stunned hv the 
magnitude of the relief that hit her at the sound of Galt's answer, a 
relief that told her the magnitude of the fear it swept away. She 
knew, only after it was over, what had hung for her on his decision, 
she knew that had his answer been different, it would have destroyed 
the valley in her eyes. 

vShe wanted to laugh, she wanted to embrace them both and laugh 
with them in celebration, it did not seem to matter whether she 
would stay here or return to the world, a week was like an endless 
span of time, either course seemed flooded by an unchanging sun- 
light — and no struggle was hard, she thought, if this was the nature 
of existence. The relief did not come from the knowledge that he 
would not renounce her, nor from afiy assurance that she would 
win — the relief came from the certainty that he would always remain 
what he was. 

“I don’t know whether I’ll go back fo the world or not," she said 
soberly, but her voice was trembling with subdued violence, which 
was pure gaiety. ‘Tip sorry that I’m stjll unable to make a decision. 
Tm certain of only one thing: that I wfan’t be afraid to decide." 

Francisco took the sudden brightness of her face as proof that the 
incident had been of no significance. But Galt understood; he glanced 

730 



at her and the glance was part amusement, part contemptuous 
reproach. 

He said nothing, until they were alone, walking down the trail to 
the valley. Then he glanced at her again, the amusement sharper in 
his eyes, and said, “You had to put me to a test in order to learn 
whether I’d fall to the lowest possible stage of altruism?” 

She did not answer, but looked at him in open, undefensive 
admission. 

He chuckled and looked away, and a few steps later said slowly, 
in the tone of a quotation. “Nobody stays here by faking reality in 
any manner whatever. ' 

Part of the intensity of her relief — she thought, as she walked 
silently by Ins side — was the shock of a contrast: she had seen, with 
the sudden, immediate vividness of sensory perception, an exact pic- 
ture of what the code of self-sacrifice would have meant, if enacted 
by the three ot them. Galt, giving up the woman he wanted, for the 
sake of his triend. faking his greatest feeling out of existence and 
himself out of her iile, no rriattci what the cost to him and to her, 
then dragging the rest ol his years through the waste of the un- 
leached and unfulfilled -she, turning for consolation to a second 
choice, faking a love she did not feci, being willing to fake, since 
her will to self-deceit was the essential required for Galt’s self- 
sacrifice, then living out hei years in hopeless longing, accepting, as 
relief for an unhealing wound, some moments of weary affection, 
plus the tenet that love is futile and happiness is not to be found on 
earth -Francisco, struggling in the elusive tog of a counterfeit reality, 
his life a fraud staged by the two who were dearest to him and most 
trusted, struggling to grasp what was missing from his happiness, 
struggling down the brittle scaffold of a lie over the abyss of the 
discovery that he was not the man she loved, but only a resented 
substitute, half-charity-patient, half-crutch, his perceptiveness becom- 
ing his danger and only his surrender to lethargic stupidity protecting 
the shoddy structure of his joy, struggling and giving up and settling 
into the dreary routine of the conviction that fulfillment is impossible 
to man — the three of them, who had had all the gifts of existence 
spread out before them, ending up as embittered hulks, who cry in 
despair that life is frustration — the frustration of not being able to 
make unreality real. 

But i his— -2, he thought — was men s moral code in the outer word, 
a code that told them to act on the premise of one another’s weak- 
ness. deceit and stupidity, and this was the pattern of their lives, this 
struggle through a fog of the pretended and unacknowledged, this 
belief that facts are not solid or final, this state where, denying any 
form to reality, men stumble through life, unreal and unformed, and 
die having never been born. Here — she thought, looking down 
through green branches at the glittering roofs of the valley — one 
dealt with men as clear and firm as sun and rocks, and the immense 
light-heartedness of her relief came from the knowledge that no bat- 
tle was hard, no decision was dangerous where there was no soggy 
uncertainty, no shapeless evasion to encounter. 

“Did it ever occur to you. Miss Taggart,” said Galt, in the casual 

731 



tone of an abstract discussion, but as if he had known 'her thoughts, 
“that there is no conflict of interests among men, neither in business 
nor in trade nor in their most personal desires — if they omit the 
irrational from their view of the possible and destruction from their 
view of the practical? There is no conflict, and no call for sacrifice, 
and no man is a threat to the aims of another- -if men understand 
that reality is an absolute not to be faked, that lies do not work, 
that the unearned cannot be had, that the undeserved cannot be 
given, that the destruction of a value which is, will not bring value 
to that which isn't. The businessman who wishes to gain a market 
by throttling a superior competitor, the worker who wants a share 
of his employer’s wealth, the artist who envies a rival’s higher tal- 
ent — theyTe all wishing facts out of existence, and destruction is the 
only means of their wish. If they pursue it, they will not achieve a 
market, a fortune or an immortal lame — they will merely destroy 
production, employment and art. A wish for the irrational is not to 
be achieved, whether the sacrificial victims are willing or not. But 
men will not cease to desire the impossible and will not lose their 
longing to destroy — so long as sell -destruction and self-sacrifice are 
preached to them as the practical means of achieving the happiness 
of the recipients.” 

He glanced at her and added slowly, a slight emphasis as sole 
change in the impersonal tone of his voice, “No one’s happiness but 
my own is in my power to achieve or to destroy. You should have 
had more respect for him and for me than to tear what you had 
feared.” 

She did not answer, she felt as if a word would overfill the fullness 
of this moment, she merely turned to him with a look of acquies- 
cence that was disarmed, childishly humble and would have been an 
apology but lor its shining joy. 

He smiled — in amusement, in understanding, almost in comrade- 
ship of the things they shared and in sanction of the things she felt. 

They went on in silence, and it seemed to her that this was a 
summer day out of a carefree youth she had never lived, it was just 
a walk through the country by two people who were free for the 
pleasure of motion and sunlight, with no unsolved burdens left to 
carry. Her sense of lightness blended with the weightless sense of 
walking downhill, as if she needed no effort to walk, only to restrain 
herself from flying, and she walked, fighting the speed of the down 
ward pull, her body leaning back, the wind blowing her skirl like a 
sail to brake her motion. 

They parted at the bottom of the trail; he went to keep an appoint- 
ment with Midas Mulligan, while she Went to Hammond’s Market 
with a list of items for the evening’s tanner as the sole concern of 
her world. 

His wife — she thought, letting hersejf hear consciously the word 
Dr. Akston had not pronounced, the ^ord she had long since lelt, 
but never named — for three weeks sh<$ had been his wife in every 
sense but one, and that final one was still to be earned, but this 
much was real and today she could permit herself to know it, to feel 
it, to live with that one thought for this one day. 

732 



The groceries, which Lawrence Hammond was lining up at her 
order on the polished counter of his store, had never appeared to 
her as such shining objects — and, intent upon them, she was only 
half-conscious of some disturbing element, of something that was 
wrong but that her mind was too full to notice. She noticed it only 
when she saw Hammond pause, frown and stare upward, at the sky 
beyond his open store front. 

In time with his words: “I think somebody’s trying to repeat your 
stunt. Miss Taggart,” she realized that it was the sound of an airplane 
overhead and that it had been there for some time, a sound which 
was not to be heard in the valley after the first of this month. 

They rushed out to the street. The small silver cross of a plane 
was circling above the ring of mountains, like a sparkling dragonfly 
about to brush the peaks with its wings. 

‘What does he think he’s doing?” said Lawrence Hammond. 

There were people at the doors of the shops and standing still all 
down the street, looking up. 

“Is ... is anyone expected?” she asked and was astonished by the 
anxiety of her own voice. 

“No,” said Hammond. “Everyone who’s got any business here is 
here.” He did not sound disturbed, but grimly curious. 

The plane was now a small dash, like a silver cigarette, streaking 
against the tlanks of the mountains: it had dropped lower. 

“Looks like a private monoplane.” said Hammond, squinting 
against the sun. “Not an army model.” 

“Will the ray screen hold out?” she asked tensely, in a tone of 
defensive resentment against the approach of an enemy. 

He chuckled. “Hold out?” 

“Will he see us 9 ” 

“That screen is safer than an underground vault. Miss Taggart. As 
>ou ought to know.” 

The plane rose, and for a moment it was only a bright speck, like 
a bit of paper blown by the wind — it hovered uncertainly, then 
dropped down again into another circling spiral. 

“What m hell is he after?” said Hammond. 

Her eyes shot suddenly to his face. 

“He’s looking for something,” said Hammond. “What?” 

“Is there a telescope somewhere?” 

“Why — yes, at the airfield, but — ” Ho was about to ask what was 
the matter with her voice- but she was running across the road, 
down the path to the airfield, not knowing that she was running, 
driven by a reason she had no time and no courage to name. 

She found Dwight Sanders at the small telescope of the control 
tower; he was watching the plane attentively, with a puzzled frown. 

“Let me see it!” she snapped. 

She clutched the metal tube, she pressed her eye to the tens, her 
hand guiding the tube slowly to follow the plane — then he saw that 
her hand had stopped, but her fingers did not open and her face 
remained bent over the telescope, pressed to the lens, until he looked 
closer and saw that the lens was pressed to her forehead. 

“What’s the matter. Miss Taggart?” 

733 



She raised her head slowly, 

“Is it anyone you know, Miss Taggart?” 

She did not answer. She hurried away, her steps rushing with the 
zigzagging aimlessness of uncertainty — she dared not run, but she 
had to escape, she had to hide, she did not know whether she was 
afraid to be seen by the men around her or by the plane above — 
the plane whose silver wings bore the number that belonged to 
Hank Rearden. 

She stopped when she stumbled over a rock and fell and noticed 
that she had been running. She was on a small ledge in the cliffs 
above the airfield, hidden from the sight of the town, open to the 
view of the sky. She rose, her hands groping for support along a 
granite wall, feeling the warmth of the sun on the rock under her 
palms — she stood, her back pressed to the wall, unable to move or 
to take her eyes off the plane. 

The plane was circling slowly, dipping down, then rising again, 
struggling — she thought — as she had struggled, to distinguish the 
sight of a wreck in a hopeless spread of crevices and boulders, an 
elusive spread neither clear enough to abandon nor to survey. He 
was searching lor the wreck of her plane, he had not given up, and 
whatever the three weeks of it had cost him, whatever he felt, the 
only evidence he would give to the world and his only answer was 
this steady, insistent, monotonous drone of a motor carrying a fragile 
craft over every deadly foot of an inaccessible chain ol mountains. 

Through the brilliant purity of the summer air, the plane seemed 
intimately close, she could see it rock on precarious currents and 
bank under the thrusts of wind. She could see, and it seemed impossi- 
ble that so clear a sight was closed to his eyes. The whole of the 
valley lay below him, flooded by sunlight, flaming with glass panes 
and green lawns, screaming to be seen — the end of his tortured quest, 
the fulfillment of more than his wishes, not the wreck of her plane 
and her body, but her living presence and his freedom — all that he 
was seeking or had ever sought was now spread open before him. 
open and waiting, his to be reached by a straight-line dive through 
the pure, clear air — his and asking nothing of him but the capacity 
to see. “Hank!” she screamed, waving her arms in desperate sig- 
nal. “Hank!” 

She fell back against the rock, knowing that she had no way to 
reach him, that she had no power to give him sight, that no power 
on earth could pierce that screen except his own mind and vision. 
Suddenly and for the first time, she felt the screen, not as the most 
intangible, but as the most grimly absolute barrier in the world. 

Slumped against the rock, she watched, in silent resignation, the 
hopeless circles of the plane’s struggle and its motor’s uncomplaining 
cry for help, a cry she had no way to ^answer. The plane swooped 
down abruptly, but it was only the start? of its final rise, it cut a swift 
diagonal across the mountains and shot into the open sky. Then, as 
if caught in the spread of a lake with np shores and no exit, it went 
sinking slowly and drowning out of sigftt. 

She thought, in bitter compassion, of how much he had failed to 
see. And 1? — she thought. If she left the valley, the screen would 

734 



dose for her as tightly, Atlantis would descend under a vault of rays 
more impregnable than the bottom of the ocean, and she, too, would 
be left to struggle for the things she had not known how to see, she, 
too, would be left to fight a mirage of primordial savagery, while 
the reality of all that she desired would never come again within 
her reach. 

But the pull of the outer world, the pull that drew her to follow 
the plane, was not the image of Hank Rcarden — she knew that she 
could not return to him, even if she returned to the world— the pull 
was the vision of Hank Rearden’s courage and the courage of all 
those still fighting to stay alive. He would not give up the search for 
her plane, when all others had long since despaired, as he would not 
give up his mills, as he would not give up any goal he had chosen 
if a single chance was left. Was she certain that no chance remained 
for the world of Taggart Transcontinental? Was she certain that the 
terms of the battle were such that she could not care to win? They 
were right, the men of Atlantis, they were right to vanish if they 
knew that they left no value behind them — but until and unless she 
saw that no chance was untaken and no battle unfought, she had no 
riglu to remain among them. This was the question that had lashed 
her for weeks, but had not driven her to a glimpse of the answer. 

She lay awake through the hours of that night, quietly motionless, 
following — like an engineer and like Hank Rcarden-— a process of 
dispassionate, piecise. almost mathematical consideration, with no 
regard for cost or feeling. The agony which he lived in his plane, 
she lived it in a soundless cube of darkness, searching, but finding 
no answer She looked at the inscriptions on the walls of her room, 
faintly visible in patches of starlight, hut the help those men had 
called in their darkest hour was not hers to call. 

* + 

‘ Yes or no, Miss Taggart?” 

She looked at the faces of the four men in the soft twilight of 
Mulligan's living room: Galt, whose face had the serene, impersonal 
attentiveness of a scientist — Francisco, whose face was made expres- 
sionless by the hint of a smile, the kind of smile that would fit either 
answer — Hugh Akston who looked compassionately gentle — Midas 
Mulligan, who had asked the question with no touch of rancor in 
his voice. Somewhere two thousand miles away, at this sunset hour, 
the page of a calendar was springing into light over the roofs of New 
York, saying: June 28 — and it seemed to her suddenly that she was 
seeing it, as if it were hanging over the heads of these men. 

“I have one more day,” she said steadily, “Will you let me have 
it? I think I’ve reached my decision, but f am not fully certain of it 
and I’ll need all the certainty possible to me.” 

“Of course,” said Mulligan. “You have, in fact, until morning of 
the day after tomorrow. We’ll wait.” 

“We’ll wait after that as well,” said Hugh Akston, “though in your 
absence, if that be necessary.” 

She stood by the window, facing them, and she felt a moment’s 
satisfaction in the knowledge that she stood straight, that her hands 
did not tremble, that her voice sounded as controlled, uncomplaining 

735 



and unpitying as theirs; it gave her a moment’s feeling of a bond 
to them. 

“If any part of your uncertainty,” said Galt, “is a conflict between 
your heart and your mind — follow your mind.” 

“Consider the reasons which make us certain that we are right,” 
said Hugh Akston, “but not the fact that we arc certain. If you are 
not convinced, ignore our certainty. Don’t be tempted to substitute 
our judgment for your own.” 

“Don’t rely on our knowledge of what’s best for your future,” 
said Mulligan. “Wc do know, but it can’t be best until you know it.” 

“Don’t consider our interests or desires,” said Francisco. “You 
have no duty to anyone but yourself.” 

She smiled, neither sadly nor gaily, thinking that none of it was 
the sort of advice she would have been given in the ouler world. 
And knowing how desperately they wished to help her where no 
help was possible, she felt it was her part to give them reassurance. 

“1 forced my way here,” she said quietly, “and I was to bear 
responsibility for the consequences. I’m bearing it.” 

Her reward was to see Galt smile: the smile was like a military 
decoration bestowed upon her. 

Looking away, she remembered suddenly Jeff Allen, the tramp 
aboard the Comet, in the moment when she had admired him for 
attempting to tell her that he knew where he was going, to spare 
her the burden of his aimlessness. She smiled faintly, thinking that 
she had now experienced it in both roles and knew that no action 
could be lower or more futile than for one person to throw upon 
another the burden of his abdication of choice. She felt an odd calm, 
almost a confident repose, she knew that it was tension, but the 
tension of a great clarity. She caught herself thinking; She’s function- 
ing well in an emergency. I'll be all right with her— and realized that 
she was thinking of herself. 

“Let it go till day after tomorrow. Miss Taggart,” said Midas Mulli- 
gan. “Tonight you’re still here.” 

“Thank you,” she said. 

She remained by the window, while they went on discussing the 
valley’s business; it was their closing conference of the month. They 
had just finished dinner — and she thought of her first dinner in this 
house a month ago; she was wearing, as she had then worn, the gray 
suit that belonged in her office, not the peasant skirt that had been 
so easy to wear in the sun. I’m still here tonight, she thought, hei 
hand pressed possessively to the window sill. 

The sun had not yet vanished beyond the mountains, but the sky 
was an even, deep, deceptively clear blue that blended with the blue 
of invisible clouds into a single spread, hiding the sun; only the edges 
of the clouds were outlined by a thin thread of flame, and it looked 
like a glowing, twisted net of neon tubing, she thought . . . like a 
chart of winding rivers . . . like . . , like! the map of a railroad traced 
in white fire on the sky. 

She heard Mulligan giving Galt the flames of those who were not 
returning to the outer world. “We have jobs for all of them,” said 
Mulligan. “In fact, there’s only ten or twelve men who’re going back 

736 



this year— mostly to finish off, convert whatever they own and come 
here permanently. I think this was our last vacation month, because 
before another year is over well all be living in this valley/' 

“Good/* said Galt, 

“Well have to, from the way things are going outside/’ 

“Yes.” 

“Francisco,” said Mulligan, “you’ll come back in a few months?” 

“In November at the latest/’ said Francisco. “I’ll send you word 
by short wave, when I’m ready to come back — will you turn the 
furnace on in my house?” 

“I will,” said Hugh Akston. “And I’ll have your supper ready for 
you when you arrive.” 

“John, I take it for granted,” said Mulligan, “that you’re not re- 
turning to New York this time.” 

Galt took a moment to glance at him, then answered evenly, “I 
have not decided it yet.” 

She noticed the shocked swiftness with which Francisco and Mulli- 
gan bent forward to stare at him — and the slowness with which Hugh 
Akston’s glance moved to his face; Akston did not seem to he 
astonished. 

“You’re not thinking of going back to that hell for another year, 
are you?” said Mulligan. 

“1 am.” 

“But — good God, John! —what for?” 

“I’ll tell you, when I’ve decided.” 

“But there’s nothing left there for you to do. We got everybody 
we knew of or can hope to know ot. Our list is completed, except 
for Hank Rearden— and we’ll get him before the year is over — and 
Miss Taggart, if she so chooses That’s all Your job is done. There’s 
nothing to look for, out there — except the final crash, when the roof 
comes down on their heads.” 

“I know it.” 

“John, yours is the one head I don’t want to be there w'hen it 
happens.” 

“You’ve never had to worry about me.” 

“But don’t you realize what stage they’re coming to? They’re only 
one step away from open violence — hell, they’ve taken the step and 
sealed and declared it long ago! — but in one more moment they'll 
see the full reality of what they’ve taken, exploding in their damned 
faces— plain, open, blind, arbitrary, bloodshedding violence, running 
amuck, hitting anything and anyone at random. That’s what I don’t 
want to see you in the midst of.” 

“I can take care of myself,” 

“John, there’s no reason for you to take the risk,” said Francisco. 

“What risk?” 

“The looters are worried about the men who’ve disappeared. 
They’re suspecting something. You, of all people* shouldn’t stay 
there any longer. There’s always a chance that they might discover 
just who and what you are.” 

'There’s some chance. Not much.” 

737 



“But there’s no reason whatever to take it. There's nothing left 
that Ragnar and I can’t finish.” 

Hugh Akston was watching them silently, leaning hack in his chair; 
his face had that look of intensity, neither quite bitterness nor quite 
a smile, with which a man watches a progression that interests him, 
but that lags a few steps behind his vision, 

“If I go back,” said Galt, “it won’t be for oui work. It will be to 
win the only thing I want lrom the world for myself, now that the 
work is done. I’ve taken nothing from the world and I've wanted 
nothing. But there’s one thing which it’s still holding and which is 
mine and which I won’t let it have. No, 1 don’t intend to break my 
oath, I won’t deal with the looters, 1 won’t be of any value or help 
to anyone out there, neither to looters nor neutrals— nor scabs. If I 
go. it won’t be for anyone’s sake but mine — and I don’t think I'm 
risking my life, but if l am — well. I’m now Iree to risk it.” 

He was not looking at her, but she had to turn away and stand 
pressed against the window frame, because her hands were trem- 
bling. 

“But, John!” cried Mulligan, waving his arm at the valley, “if 
anything happens to you, what would we—” He stopped abruptly 
and guiltily. 

Galt chuckled. “What were you about to say?” Mulligan waved 
his hand sheepishly, in a gesture of dismissal. “Wcie you about to 
say that if anything happens to me. I’ll die as the worst failure m 
the world?” 

“All right," said Mulligan guiltily, “I won't say it. I won't say that 
we couldn’t get along without you— we can I won’t beg you to stay 
here for our sake — I didn't think I'd ever revert to that rotten old 
plea, but, boy!— what a temptation it was, I can almost see why 
people do it. 1 know that whatever it is you want, it you wish to risk 
your life, that’s all there is to it— but I’m thinking only that it's 
oh God, John, it’s such a valuable life!” 

Galt smiled. “1 know it That’s why 1 don’t think I'm risking it- - 
1 think I’ll win.” 

Francisco was now silent, he was watching Galt intently, with a 
frown of wonder, not as if he had found an answer, but as ii he had 
suddenly glimpsed a question 

“Look, John,” said Mulligan, “since you haven’t decided whether 
you’ll go — you haven’t decided it yet, have you?” 

“No, not yet.” 

“Since you haven’t, would you let me remind you of a few things, 
just for you to consider?” 

“Go ahead.” 

“It's the chance dangers that I’m afraid of —the senseless, unpre- 
dictable dangers of a world falling apart. Consider the physical risks 
of complex machinery in the hands of blind fools and fear-crazed 
cowards. Just think of their railreads-fyou’d be taking a chance on 
some such horror as that Winston tifrmel incident every time you 
stepped aboard a train — and there will be more incidents of that 
kind, coming faster and faster, lliey ’ll reach the stage where no day 
will pass without a major wreck.” 

738 



“i know it.” 

“And the same will be happening in every other industry* wher- 
ever machines are used— the machines which they thought could 
replace our minds. Plane crashes, oil tank explosions, blast-furnace 
break-outs, high-tension wire electrocutions, subway cave-ins and 
trestle collapses — they’ll see them all. The very machines that had 
made their life so safe, will now make it a continuous peril.” 

“J know it.” 

“I know that you know it, but have you considered it in every 
specific detail? Have you allowed yourself to visualize it 7 I want you 
to sec the exact picture of what it is that you propose to enter — 
before you decide whether anything can justify your entering it. You 
know that the cities will be hit worst ot all. The cities were made 
by the railroads and will go with them.” 

“That’s right.” 

“When the rails are cut, the city of New' York will starve in two 
days. That’s all the supply of food it's got. It's fed by a continent 
three thousand miles long. How will they carry food to New York? 
By directive and oxcart? Hut first, before it happens, they’ll go 
through the whole of the agony - through the shrinking, the short- 
ages, the hunger riots, the stampeding violence in the midst of the 
growing stillness.” 

‘They will.” 

“They'll lose their airplanes first, then their automobiles, then their 
trucks, then their horsecarts.” 

“They will.” 

“Their factories will stop, then their furnaces and their radios. 
Then their electric light system will go." 

“It will.'’ 

“There’s only a worn thread holding that continent together. 
I here will be one tram a day, then one train a week — then the 
Taggart Bridge will collapse and — ” 

“No, it won’t!” 

It was her voice and they whirled to her. Her face was white, but 
calmer than it had been when she had answered them last. 

Slowly, Galt rose to his feet and inclined his head, as in acceptance 
of a verdict. “You ha\e made your decision,” he said. 

“I have.” 

“Dagny,” said Hugh Akston, “I'm sorry.” He spoke softly, with 
eflort, as if his words were struggling and failing to fill the silence 
of the room. “1 wish it were possible not to see this happen, I would 
have preferred anything — except to see you stay here by default of 
the courage of your convictions.” 

She spread her hands, paims out, her arms at her sides, in a gesture 
ot simple frankness, and said, addressing them all, her manner so 
calm that she could afford to show emotion, “I want you to know 
this: 1 have wished it were possible for me to die in one more month, 
so that 1 could spend it in this valley. This is how much I’ve wanted 
to remain. But so long as 1 choose to go on living, I can’t desert a 
battle which I think is mine to fight,” 

“Of course,” said Mulligan respectfully, “if you still think it.” 

739 



“If you want to know the one reason that’s taking me hack, I'll 
tell you: 1 cannot bring myself to abandon to destruction all the 
greatness of the world, all that which was mine and yours, which 
was made by us and is still ours by tight — because l cannot believe 
that men can refuse to see, that they can remain blind and deaf to 
us forever, when the truth is ours and their lives depend on accepting 
it. They xStill love their lives — and that is the uncorrupted remnant ol 
their minds. So long as men desire to live, 1 cannot lose my battle/' 

“Do they?'’ said Hugh Akston softly. “Do they desire it? No. 
don’t answer me now. I know that the answer was the hardest thing 
for any of us to grasp and to accept. Just take that question back 
with you. as the last premise left tor you to check.” 

“You’re leaving as our friend,” said Midas Mulligan, “and well 
be fighting everything you’ll do, because we know you’re wrong, bul 
it’s not you that we’ll be damning.” 

“You'll come back.” said Hugh Akston, "because yours is an error 
of knowledge, not a moral failure, not an act ol surrender to evil, 
but only the last act of being victim to your own virtue. We’ll wait 
for you — and, Dagny, when you come back, you will have discovered 
that there need never be any conflict among your desires, nor so 
tragic a clash of values as the one you’ve borne so well ” 

“Thank you,” she said, closing her eyes. 

“We must discuss the conditions ot your departure,” said Galt; he 
spoke in the dispassionate manner of an executive “First, you must 
give us your word that you will not disclose our secret or any part 
of it — neither our cause nor our existence not this valley nor your 
whereabouts for the past month- -to anyone in the outer world, not 
at any time or for any purpose whatsoever.” 

“I give you my word.” 

“Second, you must never attempt to find this valley again. You 
are not to come here uninvited. Should you break the first condition, 
it will not place us in serious danger. Should you break the second— 
it will. It is not our policy ever to be at the arbitrary mercy of the 
good faith of another person, or at the mercy of a promise that 
cannot be enforced. Nor can we expect you to place our interests 
above your own. Since you believe that your course is right, the day 
may corne when you may find it necessary to lead our enemies to 
this valley. We shall, therefore, leave you no means to do it. You 
will be taken out of the valley by plane, blindfolded, and you will 
be flown a distance sufficient to make it impossible for you ever to 
retrace the course.” 

She inclined her head. “You are right.” 

“Your plane has been repaired. Do you wish to reclaim it by 
signing a draft on your account at the Mulligan Bank?” 

“No.” 

“Then we shall hold it, until such time as you choose to pay lor 
it. Day after tomorrow, I will take you In my plane to a point outside 
the valley and leave you within reach fof further transportation.” 

She inclined her head. “Very well.”" 

It had grown dark, when they left Midas Mulligan’s. The trail back 
to Galt’s house led across the valley, past Francisco’s cabin, and the 

740 



three of them walked home together, A few squares of lighted win- 
dows hung scattered through the darkness, and the first streams of 
mist were weaving slowly across the panes, like shadows cast by a 
distant sea. They walked in silence, but the sound of their steps, 
blending into a single, steady beat, was like a speech to be grasped 
and not to be uttered in any other form. 

After a while, Francisco said, “It changes nothing, it only makes 
the span a little longer, and the last stretch is always the hardest — 
but it’s the last.” 

“I will hope so,” she said. In a moment, she repeated quietly, “The 
last is the hardest.” She turned to Galt. “May I make one request?” 

“Yes.” 

“Will you let me go tomorrow?” 

“If you wish.” 

When Francisco spoke again, moments later, it was as if he were 
addressing the unnamed wonder in her mind; his voice had the tone 
of answering a question: “Dagny, all three of us are in love’" — she 
jerked her head to him — “with the same thing, no matter what its 
forms. Don't wonder why you feel no breach among us. You’ll be 
one of us, so long as you’ll remain in love with your rails and your 
engines — and they’ll lead you back to us, no matter how many times 
you lose your way. The only man never to be redeemed is the man 
without passion.” 

“Thank you.” she said softly. 

“For what?” 

“For . . . for the way you sound.” 

“Mow do I sound? Name it, Dagny.” 

“You sound ... as if you're happy.” 

“1 am— in exactly the same way you arc. Don’t tell me what you 
teel. I know it. But, you see, the measure of the hell you’re able to 
endure is the measure ol your love. The hell 1 couldn’t bear to 
witness would be to see you being indifferent.” 

She nodded silently, unable to name as joy any part of the things 
she felt, yet feeling that he was right. 

Clots of mist were drifting, like smoke, across the moon, and in 
the diffused glow she could not distinguish the expressions of their 
faces, as she walked between them: the only expressions to perceive 
were the straight silhouettes of their bodies, the unbroken sound of 
their steps and her own feeling that she wished to walk on and 
on, a feeling she could not define, except that it was neither doubt 
noi pain. 

When they approached his cabin, Francisco stopped, the gesture 
of his hand embracing them both as he pointed to his door. “Will 
you come in — since it’s to be our last night together for some time? 
Let’s have a drink to the future of which all three of us are certain.” 

“Are we?” she asked. 

“Yes,” said Gall, “we are.” 

She looked at their faces when Francisco switched on the light in 
his house. She could not define their expressions, it was not happi- 
ness or any emotion pertaining to joy, their faces were taut and 
solemn, but it was a glowing solemnity — she thought — if this were 

741 



possible, and the odd glow she felt within her, told her that her own 
face had the same look. 

Francisco reached for three glasses from a cupboard, but slopped, 
as at a sudden thought. He placed one glass on the table, then 
reached for the two silver goblets of Sebastian d’Anconia and placed 
them beside it. 

“Are you going straight to New York, Dagny?" he asked, in the 
calm, unstrained tone of a host, bringing out a bottle of old wine. 

“Yes," she answered as calmly. 

“I’m flying to Buenos Aires day after tomorrow," he said, un- 
corking the bottle. “I’m not sure whether 1 11 be back in New York 
later, but if I am, it will be dangerous for you to see me." 

“I won’t car e about that," .she said, “unless you feel that I’m not 
entitled to see you any longer." 

“True, Dagny. You're not. Not in New York " 

He was pouring the wine and he glanced up at Galt. “John, when 
will you decide whether you’re going back or staying here 7 ” 

Galt looked straight at him. then said slowly, in the tone of a 
man who knows all the consequences of his words, “I have decided, 
Francisco. I’m going back." 

Francisco’s hand stopped. For a long moment, he was seeing noth- 
ing, but Galt’s face. Then his eyes moved to hers. He put the bottle 
down and he did not step back, bin it was as il his glance drew back 
to a wider range, to include them both. 

“But of course," he said. 

He looked as il ho had moved still farther and were now seeing 
the whole spread of their years: his voice had an even, uninflected 
sound, a quality that matched the si/e ol the vision. 

“I knew it twelve years ago," he said. ‘1 knew it before you could 
have known, and it’s I who should have seen that you would see 
That night, when you called us to New York, I thought of it then 
as” — he was speaking to Galt, but his eyes moved to Dagny — “as 
everything that you were seeking . . everything you told us to live 
for or die, if necessary. I should have seen that you would think it, 
too. It could not have been otherwise. It is as it had and ought - 
to be. It was set then, twelve years ago." He looked at Galt and 
chuckled softly. “And you say that it’s / who’ve taken the haidest 
beating?" 

He turned with too swift a movement - then, too slowly, as it in 
deliberate emphasis, he completed the task ol pouring the wine, till- 
ing the three vessels on the table. He picked up the two silver gob- 
lets, looked down at them for the pause of an instant, then extended 
one to Dagny, the other to Galt. 

“ fake it," he said. “You’ve earned it — and it wasn’t chance." 

Galt took the goblet from his hand, t>ut it was as if the acceptance 
was done by their eyes as they lookecj at each other. 

“I would have given anything to lei it be otherwise." said Galt, 
“except that which is beyond giving."; 

She held her goblet, she looked at francisco and she let him, see 
her eyes glance at Galt. “Yes," she said m the tone of an answer 
“But I have not earned it — and what you’ve paid, I’m paying it now. 

742 



and I don’t know whether HI ever earn enough to hold dear title, 
but if hell is the price — and the measure — then let me be the greedi- 
est of the three of us/’ 

As they drank, as she stood, her eyes dosed, feeling the liquid 
motion of the wine inside her throat, she knew that lor all three of 
them this was the most tortured — and the most exultant — moment 
they had ever reached. 

She did not speak to Galt, as they walked down the last stretch 
of the trail to his house. She did not turn her head to him, feeling 
that even a glance would be too dangerous. She felt, in their silence, 
both the calm of a total understanding and the tension of the knowl- 
edge that they were not to name the things they understood. 

But she faced him, when they were in his living room, with full 
confidence and as if in sudden certainty of a right — the certainty that 
she would not break and that it was now safe to speak. She said 
evenly, neither as plea nor as triumph, merely as the statement of a 
fact, “You are going back to the outer world because 1 will be there.” 

“Yes.” 

“I do not want you to go.” 

“You have no choice about it.” 

“You are going for my sake.” 

“No, for mine.” 

“Will you allow me to see you there?” 

‘No.” 

“I am not to sec you 7 ” 

“No.” 

“1 am not to know where you are or what you do?" 

“You’re not ” 

“Will you be watching me, as you did before^” 

“More so.” 

“Is vour puipose to protect me?” 

“No” 

“What is it, then?” 

“To be there on the day when you decide to join us,” 

She looked at him attentively, permitting herself no other reaction, 
but as if groping tor an answer to the first point she had not fully 
understood. 

“All the rest of us will be gone,” he explained. “It will become 
too dangerous to remain. I will remain as your last key, before the 
door of this valley closes altogether.” 

“Oh!” She choked it off before it became a moan. Then, regaining 
the manner of impersonal detachment, she asked, “Suppose I were 
to tell you that my decision is final and that I am never to join you?” 

“It would be a lie.” 

“Suppose 1 were now to decide that I wish to make it final and 
to stand by it, no matter what the future?” 

“No matter whal future evidence you observe and what convic- 
tions you form?” 

“Yes.” 

“That would be worse than a He,” 

“You are certain that I have made the wrong decision?” 

743 



“I am.” 

“Do you believe that one must be responsible for one’s own 
errors?” 

“1 do.” 

“Then why aren’t you letting me bear the consequences of mine?” 

“I am and you will.” 

“If I find, when it is too late, that 1 want to return to this valley - - 
why should you have to bear the risk of keeping that door open 
to me?” 

“I don't have to. I wouldn’t do it if I had no selfish end to gain.” 

“What selfish end?” 

“1 want you here.” 

She closed her eyes and inclined her head in open admission of 
defeat — defeat in the argument and in her attempt to face calmly 
the full meaning of that which she was leaving. 

Then she raised her head and, as if she had absorbed his kind of 
frankness, she looked at him, hiding neither her suffering nor her 
longing nor her calm, knowing that all three were in her glance. 

His face was as it had been in the sunlight of the moment when 
she had seen it for the first time- a lace of merciless serenity and 
unflinching perceptiveness, without pain or fear or guilt. She thought 
that were it possible for her to stand looking at him, at the straight 
lines of his eyebrows over the dark green eyes, at the curve ol the 
shadow underscoring the shape of his mouth, at the poured-meial 
planes of his skin in the open collar of his shirt and the casually 
immovable posture of his legs — she would wish to spend the rest ol 
her life on this spot and in this manner. And in the next instant she 
knew that if her wish were granted, the contemplation would lose 
all meaning, because she would have betrayed all the things that 
gave it value. 

Then, not as memory, but as an experience of the present, she lelt 
herself reliving the moment when she had stood at the window ot 
her room in New York, looking at a fogbound city, at the unattain- 
able shape of Atlantis sinking out of reach— and she knew that she 
was now seeing the answer to that moment She felt, not the words 
she had then addressed to the city, but that untranslated sensation 
from which the words had come: You, whom 1 have always loved 
and never found, you whom I expected to see at the end of the rails 
beyond the horizon — 

Aloud, she said, “I want you to know this. I started my life with 
a single absolute: that the world was mine to shape in the image ot 
my highest values and never to be given up to a lesser standard, no 
matter how long or hard the struggle” — you whose presence l had 
always felt in the streets of the city, the wordless voice within her 
was saying, and whose world I had wpnted to build — ‘‘Now I know 
that I was fighting for this valley ” — k is my love for you that had 
kept me moving — “It was this valley t&at I saw as possible an(J would 
exchange for nothing less and would not give up to a mindless 
evil” — my love and my hope to reach !you and my wish to be worthy 
of you on the day when I would stand before you face to face— “1 
am going back to fight for this valley — to release it from its under- 

744 



ground, to regain for it its full and rightful realm, to let the earth 
belong to you in fact, as it does in spirit — and to meet you again on 
the day when I’m able to deliver to you the whole of the world — 
ur, if 1 fail, to remain in exile from this valley to the end of my 
life” — but what is left of my life will still be yours, and I will go on 
in your name, even though it is a name I'm never to pronounce, I 
will go on serving you, even though I’m never to win, I will go on, 
to be worthy of you on the day when I would have met you, even 
though I won’t — “1 will fight for it, even if I have to fight against 
you, even if you damn me as a traitor . . . even if I am never to sec 
you again.” 

He had stood without moving, he had listened with no change in 
his face, only his eyes had looked at her as if he were hearing every 
word, even the words she had not pronounced. He answered, with 
the same look, as if the look were holding some circuit not yet to 
be broken, his voice catching some tone of hers, as if in signal of 
the same code, a voice with no sign of emotion except in the spacing 
of the words: 

“If you fail, as men have failed in their quest for a vision that 
should have been possible, yet has remained forever beyond their 
reach — if, like them, you come to think that ones highest values are 
not to be attained and one's greatest vision is not to be made real — 
don't damn this earth, as they did, don’t damn existence. You have 
seen the Atlantis they were seeking, it is here, it exists — but one 
must entei it naked and alone, with no rags from the falsehoods of 
centuries, with the purest clarity of mind — not an innocent heart, but 
that which is much rarer: an intransigent mind— as one's only posses- 
sion and key. You will not enter it until you learn that you do not 
need to convince or to conquer the world. When you learn it, you 
will see that through all the years of your struggle, nothing had 
haired you from Atlantis and there weie no chains to hold you, 
except the chains you were willing to wear. Through all those years, 
lhat which you most wished to win was waiting for you”— he looked 
at her as if he were speaking to the unspoken words in her mind— 
“waiting as unremittingly as you were lighting, as passionately, as 
desperately — but with a greater ceitainty than yours. Go out to con- 
linue your struggle. Go on carrying unchosen burdens, taking unde- 
served punishment and believing that justice can be served by the 
offer of your own spirit to the most unjust of tortures. But in your 
worst and darkest moments remember that you have seen another 
kind of world. Remember that you can reach it whenever you choose 
to see. Remember that it will be waiting and that it’s real, it's possi- 
ble — it’s yours.” 

Then, turning his head a little, his voice as clear, but his eyes 
breaking the circuit, he asked, “What time do you wish to leave 
tomorrow?” 

“Oh . . . ! As early as it will be convenient for you.” 

“Then have breakfast ready at seven and we’ll take off at eight.” 

“1 will.” 

He reached into his pocket and extended to her a small, shining 

745 



disk which she could not distinguish at first. He dropped it on the 
palm of her hand: it was a five^iollar gold piece. 

“The last of your wages for the month,” he said. 

Her fingers snapped dosed over the coin too tightly, hut she an- 
swered calmly and tonelessly, “Thank you.” 

“Good night, Miss Taggart.” 

“Good night.” 

She did not sleep in the hours that were still left to her. She sat 
on the floor of her room, her face pressed to the bed, feeling nothing 
but the sense of his presence beyond the wall. At times, she felt as 
if he were before her, as if she were sitting at his feet. She spent 
her last night with him in this manner. 

* * 

She left the valley as she had come, carrying away nothing that 
belonged to it. She left the few possessions she had acquired -her 
peasant skirt, a blouse, an apron, a few pieces of underwear — folded 
neatly in a drawer of the chest in her room. She looked at them for 
a moment, before she closed the drawer, thinking that if she came 
back, she would, perhaps, still find them there. She took nothing 
with her but the five-dollar gold piece and the band of tape still 
wound about her ribs. 

The sun touched the peaks of the mountains, drawing a shining 
circle as a frontier of the valley when she climbed aboard the plane 
She leaned back in the seat beside him and looked at Galt's face 
bent over her, as it had been bent when she had opened her eyes 
oh the first morning. Then she closed her eyes and felt his hands 
tying the blindfold across her face. 

She heard the blast of the motor, not as sound, but as the shuddei 
of an explosion inside her body; only it felt like a distant shudder, as 
if the person feeling it would have been hurt if she were not so far away 

She did not know when the wheels left the ground or when the 
plane crossed the circle of the peaks. She lay still, with the pounding 
beat of the motor as her only perception of space, as if she were 
earned inside a current of sound that rocked once in a while. The 
sound came from his engine, from the control of his hands on the 
wheel; she held onto that; the rest was to be endured, not resisted 

She lay still, her legs stretched forward, her hands on the arms of 
the seat, with no sense of motion, not even her own, to give her a 
sense of time, with no space, no sight, no future, with the night ot 
dosed eyelids under the pressure of the cloth — and with the knowl- 
edge of his presence beside her as her single, unchanging reality. 

They did not speak. Once, she said suddenly, “Mr. Galt.” 

“Yes?” 

“No. Nothing, 1 just wanted lo knovy whether you were still there ” 

“I will always be there.” ’ 

She did not know for how many rdiles the memory of the sound 
of words seemed like a small landmark rolling away into the distance, 
then vanishing. Then there was nothing but the stillness of aii indivis- 
ible present. 

She did not know whether a day h^d passed or an hour, whert she 
felt the downward, plunging motion which meant that they were 

746 



about to land or to crash; the two possibilities seemed equal to her 
mind. 

She felt the jolt of the wheels against the ground as an oddly 
delayed sensation: as if some fraction of time had gone to make her 
believe it. 

She felt the running streak of jerky motion, then the jar of the 
stop and of silence, then the touch of his hands on her hair, removing 
the blindfold. 

She saw a glaring sunlight, a stretch of scorched weeds going off 
into the sky, with no mountains to stop it, a deserted highway and 
the hazy outline of a town about a mile away. She glanced at her 
watch: forty-seven minutes ago, she had still been in the valley. 

‘You’ll find a Taggart station there,” he said, pointing at the town, 
“and you’ll be able to take a train.” 

She nodded, as if she understood. 

He did not follow her as she descended to the ground. He leaned 
acioss the wheel toward the open door of the plane, and they looked 
at each other. She stood, her face raised to him, a faint wind stirring 
her hair, the straight line of her shoulders sculptured by the trim suit 
of a business executive amidst the fiat immensity of an empty prairie. 

The movement of his hand pointed east, towaid some invisible 
cities. “Don’t look lor me out there,” he said. “You will not find 
me- -until you want me for what I am. And when you’ll want me, 
I'll be the easiest man to find.” 

She heard the sound of the door falling dosed upon him; it seemed 
louder than the blast of the propeller that followed She watched the 
lun of the plane's wheels and the trail of weeds left flattened behind 
them. Then she saw a strip of sky between wheels and weeds. 

She looked around her. A reddish ha/e of heat hung over the 
shapes of the town in the distance, and the shapes seemed to sag 
under a rusty tinge: above their roofs, she saw the remnant of a 
crumbled smokestack. She saw a dry, yellow scrap rustling faintly in 
the weeds beside her: it was a piece of newspaper. She looked at 
these objects blankly, unable to make them real. 

She raised her eyes to the plane. She watched the spread of its 
wings grow smaller in the sky, draining away m its wake the sound 
ol as motor. It kept rising, wings first, like a long silver cross; then 
the curve of its motion went following the sky, dropping slowly closer 
to the earth; them it seemed not to move any longer, but only to 
shrink. She watched it like a star in the process of extinction, while 
it shrank from cross to dot to a burning spark which she was no 
longer certain of seeing. When she saw that the spread of the sky was 
strewn wuth such sparks all over, she knew that the plane was gone. 

Chapter 111 ANTI-GREED 

"What am 1 doing here?” asked Dr. Robert Stadler. “Why was l 
asked to come here? I demand an explanation. I'm m»i accustomed 
t0 being dragged halfway across a continent without rhyme, reason 
°r notice.” 


747 



Dr. Floyd Ferris smiled. “Which makes me appreciate it all the 
more that you did come, Dr. Stadler.” It was impossible to tell 
whether his voice had a tone of gratitude — or of gloating. 

The sun was beating down upon them and Dr. Stadler felt a streak 
of perspiration oozing along his temple. He could not hold an angrily, 
embarrassingly private discussion in the middle of a crowd streaming 
to fill the benches of the grandstand around them — the discussion 
which he had tried and failed to obtain for the last three days. It 
occurred to him that that was precisely the reason why his meeting 
with Dr. Ferris had been delayed to this moment; but he brushed 
the thought aside, just as he brushed some insect buzzing to reach 
his wet temple. 

“Why was 1 unable to get in touch with you?’' he asked. The fraudu- 
lent weapon of sarcasm now seemed to sound less effective than ever, 
but it was Dr. Stadler’s only weapon: “Why did you find it necessary 
to send me messages on official stationery worded in a style proper, 
Fm sure, for Army' 1 — orders, he was about to say, but didn’t — “com- 
munications. but certainly not for scientific correspondence? 1 ’ 

“It is a government matter,” said Dr. Ferns gently. 

“Do you realize that I was much too busy and that this meant an 
interruption of my work?” 

“Oh yes,” said Dr. Ferris noncommittally. 

“Do you realize that I could have refused to come?” 

“But you didn’t,” said Dr. Ferris softly. 

“Why was I given no explanation? Why didn't you come for me in 
person, instead of sending those incredible young hooligans with their 
mysterious gibberish that sounded hall -science, half-pulp-magazine?" 

“I was too busy,” said Dr. Ferns blandly. 

“Then would you mind telling me what you’re doing in the middle 
of a plain in Iowa — and what I’m doing here, for that matter?” He 
waved contemptuously at the dusty horizon of an empty prairie and 
at the three wooden grandstands. The stands were newly erected, 
and the wood, too, seemed to perspire; he could see drops of resin 
sparkling in the sun. 

“We are about to witness an historical event. Dr. Stadler. An 
occasion which will become a milestone on the road of science, civil] 
zation, social welfare and political adaptability.” Dr. Ferris’ voice 
had the tone of a public relations man’s memorized handout. “The 
turning point of a new era.” 

“What event? What new era?” 

“As you will observe, only the most distinguished citizens, the 
cream of our intellectual elite, have been chosen for the special privi- 
lege of witnessing this occasion. We cpuld not omit your name, could 
we? — and we feel certain, of coursfe, that we can count on your 
loyalty and cooperation.” f 

He could not catch Dr. Ferris’ eyef The grandstands were rapidly 
filling with people, and Dr. Ferris jkept interrupting himself con- 
stantly to wave to nondescript newcomers, whom Dr. Stadler had 
never seen before, but who were personages, as he could tell by the 
particular shade of gaily informal deference in Ferris' waving. They 

748 



all seemed to know Dr. Ferris and to seek him out, as if he were 
the master of ceremonies —or the star — of the occasion. 

“If you would kindly be specific for a moment,' ” said Dr. Stadler, 
“and tell me what — ” 

“Hi, Spud!” called Dr. Ferris, waving to a portly, white-haired 
man who filled the full-dress uniform of a general. 

Dr. Stadler raised his voice: “I said, if you would kindly concen- 
trate long enough to explain to me what in hell is going on — " 

“But it’s veiy simple. It’s the final triumph of . . You’ll have to 
excuse me a minute. Dr. Stadler/' said Dr. Ferris hastily, tearing 
forward, like an overtrained lackey at the sound of a bell, in the 
direction of what looked like a group of aging rowdies; he turned 
hack long enough to add two words which he seemed reverently to 
consider as a full explanation: “The press!” 

Dr. Stadler sat down on the wooden bench, feeling unaccountably 
reluctant to brush against anything around him. The three grand- 
stands were spaced at intervals m a semi-curve, like the tiers of a 
small, private circus, with room for some three hundred people; they 
seemed built lor the viewing of some spectacle — but they faced the 
emptiness of a fiat prairie stretching off to the horizon, with nothing 
m sight but the dark blotch of a tarmhouse miles awa> 

There were radio microphones in front of one stand, which seemed 
icscrvcd for the press. I here was a contraption resembling a portable 
switchboard in front of the stand reserved fur officials; a few levers 
on polished metal sparkled in the sun on the face of the switchboaid. 
In an improvised parking lot behind the stands, the glitter of luxuri- 
ous new cars seemed a biightly reassuring sight. But it was the build- 
ing that stood on a knoll some thousand feet away that gave Dr. 
Stadler a vague sense of uneasiness. It was a small, squat structure 
of unknown purpose, with massive stone walls, no windows except 
a few slits protected by stout iron bars, and a large dome, grotesquely 
too heavy lor the rest, that seemed to press the structure down into 
the soil. A few outlets protruded from the base of the dome, in 
loose, irregular shapes, resembling badly poured clay funnels; they 
did not seem to belong to an industrial age or to any known usage 
The building had an air of silent malevolence, like a puffed, venom- 
ous mushroom; it was obviously modern, but its sloppy, rounded, 
ineptly unspecific lines made it look like a primitive structure un- 
earthed in the heart of the jungle, devoted to some secret rites of 
savagery. 

Dr. Stadler sighed with irritation; he was tired of secrets. “Confi- 
dential" and “'Fop Confidential" had been the words stamped on 
the invitation which had demanded that he travel to Iowa on a two- 
day notice and for an unspecified purpose. Two young men. who 
called themselves physicists, had appeared at the Institute to escort 
hint; his calls to Ferris’ office in Washington had remained unan- 
swered. The young men had talked- - through an exhausting trip by 
government plane, then a clammy ride in a government car — about 
science, emergencies, social equilibriums and the need of secrecy, till 
he knew less than he had known at the start; he noticed only that 
two words kept recut ring in their jabber, which had also appeared 

749 



in the text of the invitation, two words that had an ominous sounc 
when involving an unknown issue: the demands f6r his ‘‘loyalty’ 
and "cooperation.” 

The young men had deposited him on a bench in the front rou 
of the grandstand and had vanished, like the folding gear of a mecha 
nism, leaving hint to the sudden presence of Dr, Ferris in person 
Now, watching the scene around him, watching Dr. Ferris’ vague 
excited, loosely casual gestures in the midst of a group of newsmen 
he had an impression of bewildering confusion, of senseless, chaotic 
inefficiency — and of a smooth machine working to produce the exaci 
degree of that impression needed at the exact moment. 

He felt a single, sudden flash of panic, in which, as in a flash ol 
lightning, he permitted himself to know that he felt a despeiale de- 
sire to escape. But he slammed his mind shut against it. He knew 
that the darkest secret of the occasion — more crucial, more untouch 
able, more deadly than whatever was hidden in the mushroom build 
ing — was that which had made him agree to come. 

He would never have to learn his own motive, he thought; he 
thought it, not by means of woids, but by means of the brief, viciou;' 
spasm of an emotion that resembled irritation and felt like acid. The 
words that stood in his mind, as they had stood when he had agreed 
to come were like a voodoo formula which one recites when it n 
needed and beyond which one must not look: What ran you do when 
you have to deal with people? 

He noticed that the stand reserved for those whom Ferris hae 
called the intellectual elite was larger than the stand prepared foi 
government officials. He caught himself feeling a swift little sneai 
of pleasure at the thought that he had been placed in the Iron 
row. He turned to glance at the tiers behind him. The sensation he 
experienced was like a small, gray shock: that random, faded, shop 
worn assembly was not his conception of an intellectual elite. Hi 
saw defensively belligerent men and tastelessly dressed women — hi 
saw mean, rancorous, suspicious faces that bore the one mark incam 
patible with a standard bearer of the intellect: the mark of uncer 
tainty. He could find no face he knew, no face to recognize as famou! 
and none likely ever to achieve such recognition. He wondered b> 
what standard these people had been selected. 

Then he noticed a gangling figure in the second row, the figure o 
an elderly man with a long, stack face that seemed faintly familial 
to him, though he could recall nothing about it, except a vague mem 
ory, as of a photograph seen in some unsavory publication. Hi 
leaned toward a woman and asked, pointing, "Could you tell me ihi 
name of that gentleman?” The won^an answered in a whisper o 
awed respect, "That is Dr. Simon ^ritchett!” Dr. Stadler turnci 
away, wishing no one would see hiifi, wishing no one would evci 
learn that he had been a member of jthat group. 

He raised his eyes and saw that Feiyis was leading the whole pres? 
gang toward him. He saw Ferris sweeping his arm at him, in thi 
manner of a tourist guide, and declaring, when they were dost 
enough to be heard, "But why should you waste your time on me 

750 



when (here is the source of today’s achievement, the man who made 
it all possible — Dr. Robert Stadler!” 

K seemed to him for an instant that he saw an incongruous look 
on the worn, cynical faces of the newsmen, a look that was not quite 
respect, expectation or hope, but more like an echo of these, like a 
faint reflection of the look they might have worn in their youth on 
hearing the name of Robeit Stadler. In that instant, he felt an im- 
pulse which he would not acknowledge: the impulse to tell them that 
he knew nothing about today's event, that his power counted for 
less than theirs, that he had been brought here as a pawn in some 
confidence game, almost as . . . as a prisoner. 

Instead, he heard himself answering their questions in the smug, 
condescending tone of a man who shares all the secrets of the highest 
authorities- “Yes, the Stale Science Institute is proud of its record 
of public service. . . . The State Science Institute is not the tool of 
any private interests or personal greed, if is devoted to the welfare 
of mankind, to the good of humanity as a whole — ” spouting, like a 
dictaphone, the sickening generalities he had hcaid from Dr. Ferris. 

He would not permit himself to know that what he felt was self- 
loathing; he identified the emotion, but not its object; it was loathing 
for the men around him, he thought; it was they who were forcing 
him to go through this shameful performance. What can you do— 
he thought — when you have to deal with people? 

lhe newsmen were making brief notes of his answers. Their faces 
now had the look of automatons acting out the routine of pretending 
that they were hearing news in the empty utterances of another 
automaton. 

“Dr. Stadler," asked one of them, pointing at the building on the 
knoll, “is it true that you consider Project X the greatest achievement 
of the State Science Institute''” 

There was a dead drop of silence. 

“Project . . . X . . ?” said Dr Stadler. 

He knew that something was ominously wrong tn the tone of his 
voice, because he saw the heads of the newsmen go up, as at the 
sound of an alarm; he saw them wailing, their pencils poised. 

For one instant, while he felt the muscles of his face cracking into 
the fraud of a smile, he felt a formless, an almost supernatural terror, 
as if lie sensed again the silent working of some smooth machine, as 
if he were caught in it, part of it and doing its irrevocable will. 

Project X?" he said softly, in the mysterious tone of a conspirator. 
“Well, gentlemen, the value — and the motive— of any achievement 
of the State Science Institute are not to be doubted, since it is a 
nonprofit venture— need I say more?” 

He raised his head and noticed that Dr. Ferris had stood on the 
edge of the group through the whole of the interview. He wondered 
whether he imagined that the look on Dr. Ferris’ lace now seemed 
•css tense — and more impertinent. 

Two resplendent cars came shooting at full speed into the parking 
•ot and stopped with a flourish of screeching brakes. The newsmen 
deserted him in the middle of a sentence and went running to meet 
•he group alighting from the cars. 

75 i 



Dr. Stadlcr turned to Ferris. " What is Project X?” + he asked 
sternly. 

Dr. Ferris smiled in a manner of innocence and insolence together. 
“A non-profit venture,” he answered — and went running off to meet 
the newcomers. 

From the respectful whispers of the crowd, Dr. Stadler learned 
that the little man in a wilted linen suit, who looked like a shyster, 
striding briskly in the center of the new group, was Mr. Thompson, 
the Head of the State. Mr. Thompson was smiling, frowning and 
barking answers to the newsmen. Dr. Ferris was weaving through 
the group, with the grace of a cat rubbing against sundry legs. 

The group came closer and he saw Ferris steering them in his 
direction. "Mr. Thompson,” said Dr. Ferris sonorously, as they ap- 
proached, "may 1 present Dr. Robert Stadler?” 

Dr. Stadler saw the little shyster’s eyes studying him for the frac- 
tion of a second: the eyes had a touch of superstitious awe, as at the 
sight of a phenomenon from a mystical realm forever incomprehensi- 
ble to Mr. Thompson— and they had the piercing, calculating shrewd- 
ness of a ward heeler who feels certain that nothing is immune from 
his standards, a glance like the visual equivalent of the words; What's 
your angle? 

"It’s an honor. Doctor, an honor. I'm sure,” said Mr. Thompson 
briskly, shaking his hand. 

He learned that the tall, stoop-shouldered man with a crew haircut 
was Mr. Wesley Mouch. He did not catch the names of the others, 
whose hands he shook. As the group proceeded toward the officials' 
grandstand, he was left with the burning sensation of a discovery he 
dared not face: the discovery that he had felt anxiously pleased by 
the little shyster's nod of approval. 

A party of young attendants, who looked like movie theater ush- 
ers, appeared from somewhere with handcarts of glittering objects, 
which they proceeded to distribute to the assembly. The objects were 
field glasses. Dr. Ferris took his place at the microphone of a public- 
address system by the officials’ stand. At a signal from Wesley 
Mouch, his voice boomed suddenly over the prairie, an unctuous, 
fraudulently solemn voice magnified by the microphone inventor's 
ingenuity into the sound and power of a giant: 

"Ladies and gentlemen . . . !” 

The crowd was struck into silence, all heads jerking unanimously 
toward the graceful figure of Dr. Floyd Ferris. 

"Ladies and gentlemen, you have been chosen — in recognition of 
your distinguished public service and social loyalty — to witness the 
unveiling of a scientific achievement of such tremendous importance, 
such staggering scope, such epoch-making |K)ssibilities that up to this 
moment it has been known only to a very few and only as Project X.” 

Dr. Stadler focused his field glasses onflhe only thing in sight- 
on the blotch of the distant farm. ) 

He saw that it was the deserted ruin of a farmhouse, which had ob- 
viously been abandoned years ago. Thedightof the sky showed through 
the naked ribs of the roof, and jagged bits* of glass framed the dark- 
ness of empty windows. He saw a sagging barn, the rusted tower of 

752 



a water wheel, and the remnant of a tractor lying upturned with its 
treads in the air. 

Dr. Ferris was talking about the crusaders of science and about 
the years of selfless devotion, unremitting toil and persevering re- 
search that had gone into Project X. 

It was odd — thought Dr. Stadler, studying the ruins of the farm — 
that there should be a herd of goats in the midst of such desolation. 
There were six or seven of them, some drowsing, some munching 
lethargically at whatever grass they could find among the sun- 
scorched weeds. 

“Project X,” Dr. Ferris was saying, “was devoted to some special 
research in the field of sound. The science of sound has astonishing 
aspects, which laymen would scarcely suspect. . . .” 

Some fifty feet away from the farmhouse, Dr. Stadler saw a struc- 
ture, obviously new and of no possible purpose whatever: it looked 
like a few spans of a steel trestle, rising into empty space, supporting 
nothing, leading nowhere. 

Dr. Ferris was now talking about the nature of sound vibrations. 

Dr. Stadler aimed his field glasses at the horizon beyond the farm, 
but there was nothing else to be seen for dozens of miles. The sud- 
den, straining motion of one of the goats brought his eyes back to 
the herd. He noticed that the goats were chained to stakes driven 
at intervals into the ground. 

. . And it was discovered,” said Dr. Ferris, “that there arc 
certain Irequendcs of sound vibration which no structure, organic or 
inorganic, can withstand. . . .” 

Dr Stadler noticed a silvery spot bouncing over the weeds among 
the herd. It was a kid that had not been chained: it kept leaping and 
weaving about its mother. 

“. . . T he sound ray is controlled by a panel inside the giant under- 
ground laboratory,” said Dr. Ferris, pointing at the building on the 
knoll. “That panel is known to us affectionately as the ‘Xylophone' — 
because one must be darn careful to strike the right keys, or, rather, 
to pull the right levers. Foi this special occasion, an extension Xylo- 
phone, connected to the one inside, has been erected here”— he 
pointed to the switchboard in front of the officials' stand — “so that 
you may witness the entire operation and see the simplicity of the 
whole procedure. . .” 

Dr. Stadler found pleasure in watching the kid. a soothing, reassur- 
ing kind of pleasure. The little creature seemed barely a week old, 
it looked like a ball of white fur with graceful long legs, it kept 
bounding in a manner of deliberate, gaily ferocious awkwardness, all 
foui of its legs held stiff and straight. It seemed to be leaping at the 
sunrays, at the summer air, at the joy of discovering its own exis- 
tence. 

“. . . The sound ray is invisible, inaudible and fully controllable in 
respect to target, direction and range. Its first public test, which you 
are about to witness, has been set to cover a small sector, a mere 
two miles, in perfect safety, with all space cleared for twenty miles 
beyond. The present generating equipment in our laboratory is capa- 
ble of producing rays to cover — through the outlets which you may 

753 



observe under the dome — the entire countryside within 'a radius of 
a hundred miles, a circle with a periphery extending from the shore 
of the Mississippi, roughly from the bridge of the Taggart Transconti- 
nental Railroad, to Des Moines and Fort Dodge, Iowa, to Austin, 
Minnesota, to Woodman, Wisconsin, to Rock Island, Illinois. This is 
only a modest beginning. We possess the technical knowledge to 
build generators with a range of two and three hundred miles— but 
due to the fact that wc were unable to obtain in time a sufficient 
quantity of a highly heat-resistant metal, such as Rearden Metal, we 
had to be satisfied with our present equipment and radius of control. 
In honor of our great executive, Mr. Thompson, under whose farsighted 
administration the State Science Institute was granted the funds without 
which Project X would not have been possible, this great invention will 
henceforth be known as the Thompson Harmonizer!” 

The crowd applauded. Mr. Thompson sat motionless, with his face 
held self-consciously stiff. Dr. Stadlcr felt certain that this small-time 
shyster had had as little to do with the Project as any of the movie- 
usher attendants, that he possessed neither the mind nor the initia- 
tive nor even the sufficient degree of malice to cause a new gopher 
trap to be brought into the world, that he, too, was only the pawn 
of a silent machine — a machine that had no center, no leader, no 
direction, a machine that had not been set m motion by Dr. Ferris 
or Wesley Mouch, or any of the cowed creatures in the grandstands, 
or any of the creatures behind the scenes— -an impersonal, unthink- 
ing, unembodied machine, of which nunc was the driver and all were 
the pawns, each to the degree of his evil. Dr. Stadlei gripped the 
edge of the bench: he felt a desire to leap to his feet and run. 

. . As to the function and the purpose of the sound ray, 1 shall 
say nothing. I shall let it speak for itself. You will now see it work. 
When Dr. Blodgett pulls the levers of the Xylophone, I suggest that 
you keep your eyes on the target — which is that farmhouse two miles 
away. There will be nothing else to see. The ray itself is invisible. It 
has long been conceded by all progressive thinkers that there are no 
entities, only actions — and no values, only consequences. Now, ladies 
and gentlemen, you will see the action and the consequences of the 
Thompson Harmonize r.” 

Dr. Ferris bowed, walked slowly away from the microphone and 
came to take his seat on the bench beside Dr. Stadler. 

A youngish, fattish kind of man took his stand by the switch- 
board — and raised his eyes expectantly toward Mr. Thompson. Mr. 
Thompson looked blankly bewildered for an instant, as if something 
had slipped his mind, until Wesley Mouch leaned over and whispered 
some word into his ear. “Contact!” said Mr. Thompson loudly. 

Dr. Stadler could not bear to watch lh£ graceful, undulating, ef- 
feminate motion of Dr. Blodgett’s hand as it pulled the first lever of 
the switchboard, then the next. He raised nis field glasses and looked 
at the farmhouse. 

In the instant when he focused his len^, a goat was pulling at its 
chain, reaching placidly for a tall, dry thistle. In the next instant, the 
goat rose into the air, upturned, its legs Stretching upward and jer- 
king, then fell into a gray pile made of seven goats in convulsions. 

754 



By the time Dr. Stadler believed it, the pile was motionless, except 
for one beast’s leg sticking out of the mass, stiff as a rod and shaking 
as in a strong wind. The farmhouse tore into strips of clapboard and 
went down, followed by a geyser of the bricks of its chimney. The 
tractor vanished into a pancake. 'Hie water tower cracked and its 
shreds hit the ground while its wheel was still describing a long curve 
through the air, as if ot its own leisurely volition. The steel beams 
and girders of the solid new trestle collapsed like a structure of 
matchsticks under the breath of a sigh. It was so swift, so uncon- 
tested, so simple, that Dr. Stadler felt no horror, he felt nothing, it 
was not the reality he had known, it was the realm of a child’s 
nightmare where material objects could be dissolved by means of a 
single malevolent wish. 

He moved the field glasses from his eyes. He was looking at an 
empty prairie. There was no tarm, there was nothing in the distance 
except a darkish strip that looked like the shadow of a cloud. 

A single, high, thin scream rose from the tiers behind him, as some 
woman fainted. He wondered why she should scream so long after 
the fact — and then he realized that the time elapsed since the touch 
of the first lever was not a full minute 

He raised his held glasses again, almost as if he were suddenly 
hoping that the cloud shadow would be all he would see. But the 
material objects were still there; they were a mount ot refuse. He 
moved his glasses over the wreckage, in a moment, he realized that 
he was looking for the kid. He could not find it; there was nothing 
but a pile of gray lur. 

When he lowered the glasses and turned, he found Dr. Ferris 
looking at him. He felt certain that through the whole of the test, it 
was not the target, it was his lace that Ferris had watched, as if to 
see whether he, Robert Stadler, could withstand the ray. 

“I hat’s all there is to it,” the laltish Dr. Blodgett announced 
through the microphone, m the ingratiating sales tone of a department- 
store floorwalker. “There is no nail or rivet remaining in the frame 
of the structures and there is no blood vessel left unbroken in the 
bodies of the animals.” 

The crowd was rustling with jerky movements and high-pitched 
whispers People were looking at one another, rising uncertainly and 
dropping down again, restlessly demanding anything but this pause. 
There was a sound of submerged hysteria in the whispers. They 
seemed to be waiting to be told what to think. 

Dr. Stadler saw a woman being escorted down the steps from the 
back row, her head bent, a handkerchief pressed to her mouth: she 
was sick to her stomach. 

He turned away and saw that Dr. Ferris was still watching him. 
Dr. Stadler leaned back a little, his face austere and scornful, the 
face of the nation’s greatest scientist, and asked. “Who invented that 
ghastly thing?” 

“You did,” 

Dr. Stadler looked at him, not moving. 

“It is merely a practical appliance,” said Dr, Ferns pleasantly* 
“based upon your theoretical discoveries. U was derived from your 

755 



invaluable research into the nature of cosmic rays and of the spatial 
transmission of energy.” 

“Who worked on the Project?” 

“A few third-raters, as you would call them. Really, there was 
very little difficulty. None of them could have begun to conceive of 
the first step toward the concept of your energy-transmission for- 
mula, but given that — the rest Was easy.” 

“What is the practical purpose of this invention? What are the 
‘epoch-making possibilities”?” 

“Oh, but don't you see? It is an invaluable instrument of public 
security. No enemy would attack the possessor of such a weapon. It 
will set the country free from the fear of aggression and permit it 
to plan its future in undisturbed safety.” His voice had an odd care- 
lessness. a note of offhand improvisation, as if he were neither ex- 
pecting nor attempting to be believed. “It will relieve social frictions. 
It will promote peace, stability and— as we have indicated — harmony. 
It will eliminate all danger of war/’ 

“What war? What aggression? With the whole world starving and 
all those People's vStates barely subsisting on handouts from this 
country — where do you sec any danger of war ? Do you expect those 
ragged savages to attack you?” 

Dr. Ferris looked straight into his eyes. “Internal enemies can be 
as great a danger to the people as external ones.” he answered. 
“Perhaps greater.” This time his voice sounded as if he expected 
and was certain to be understood. “Social systems are so precarious. 
But think of what stability could be achieved by a few scientific 
installations at strategic key points. It would guarantee a state of 
permanent peace — don't you think so?” 

Dr. Stadler did not move or answer; as the seconds clicked past 
and his face still held an unchanged expression, it began to look 
paralyzed. His eyes had the stare of a man who suddenly sees that 
which he had known, had known from the first, had spent years 
trying not to see, and who is now engaged in a contest between the 
sight and his power to deny its existence. “1 don’t know what you’re 
talking about!” he snapped at last. 

Dr. Ferris smiled. “No private businessman or greedy industrialist 
would have financed Project X,” he said softly, in the tone of an idle, 
informal discussion. “He couldn’t have afforded it. It’s an enormous 
investment, with no prospect of material gain. What profit could he 
expect from it? There are no profits henceforth to be derived from 
that farm.” He pointed at the dark strip in the distance. “But, as 
you have so well observed. Project X had to be a non-profit venture. 
Contrary to a business firm, the State Science Institute had no trou- 
ble in obtaining funds for the Project. Yi>u have not heard of the 
Institute having any financial difficulties the past two years, have 
you? And it used to be such a problem -(-getting them to vote the 
funds necessary for the advancement off science. They always de- 
manded gadgets for their cash, as you usefd to say. Well, here was a 
gadget which some people in power cou!d| fully appreciate. They got 
the others to vote for it it wasn’t difficult. In fact, a great many of 
those others felt safe in voting money for a project that was secret — 

756 



they fell certain it was important, since they were not considered 
important enough to be let in on it. There were, of course, a few 
skeptics and doubters. But they gave in when they were reminded 
that the head of the State Science Institute was Dr. Robert Stadler — 
whose judgment and integrity they could not doubt.” 

Or. Stadler was looking down at his fingernails. 

The sudden screech of the microphone jerked the crowd into an 
instantaneous attentiveness; people seemed to be a second’s worth 
of sdf-control away from panic. An announce!, with a voice like a 
machine gun spitting smiles, barked cheerily that they were now to 
witness the radio broadcast that would break the news of the great 
discovery to the whole nation. Then, with a glance at his watch, his 
script and the signaling arm of Wesley Mouch. he veiled into the 
spaikling snake-head of the microphone — into the living rooms, the 
offices, the studies, the nurseries of the country. ‘Ladies and gentle- 
men! Project X!” 

Dr. Ferris leaned toward Dr. Stadler- through the staccato hoof- 
beats of the announcer’s voice galloping across the continent with a 
description of the new invention— and said in the tone of a casual 
remark. “It is vitally important that there be no criticism of the 
Project in the country at this precarious time,” then added semi- 
accidentally, as a semi-joke, “that there be no criticism of anything 
at any time. ' 

* * and the nation’s political, cultural, intellectual and moral lead 
ers,” the announcer was yelling into the microphone, “who have 
witnessed this great event, as your lepresentatives and in your name, 
will now tell you their views of it in person!” 

Mr. Ihompson was the first to mount the wooden steps to the 
platform of the microphone lie snapped his way through a brief 
speech, hailing a new era and declaring — in the belligerent tone of 
a challenge to unidentified enemies— that science belonged to the 
people and that every man on the face of the globe had a right to 
a share of the advantages created bv technological progress. 

Wesley Mouch came next. He spoke about social planning and the 
necessity of unanimous rallying in support of the planners. He spoke 
about discipline, unity, austerity and the patriotic duty of bearing 
temporary hardships. “We have mobilized the best brains of the 
country to work tor your welfare. This great invention was the prod- 
uct of the genms of a man whose devotion to the cause of humanity 
is not to be questioned, a man acknowledged by all as the greatest 
mind of the century — Dr. Robert Stadler!” 

“ What ?" gasped Dr. Stadler, whirling toward Ferris. 

Dr. Ferris looked at him with a glance of patient mildness. 

“He didn’t ask my permission to say that!” Dr. Stadler half- 
snapped, half-whispered. 

Dr. Ferris spread out his hands in a gesture of reproachful help- 
lessness. “Now you see. Dr. Stadler, how unfortunate it is if you 
allow yourself to be disturbed by political matters, which you have 
always considered unworthy of your attention and knowledge. You 
see, it is not Mr. Mouch ’s function to ask permissions.” 

The figure now slouching against the sky on the speakers’ plat- 

757 



form, coiling itself about the microphone, talking in the bored, con- 
temptuous tone of an off-color story, was Dr. Simon Pritchett. He 
was declaring that the new invention was an instrument of social 
welfare, which guaranteed general prosperity, and that anyone who 
doubted this self-evident fact was an enemy of society, to be treated 
accordingly. “This invention, the product of Dr. Robert Sladler, the 
pre-eminent lover of freedom — *' 

Dr. Ferris opened a briefcase, produced some pages ol neatly 
typed copy and turned to Dr. Stadler. ‘You are to be the climax of 
the broadcast,” he said. “You will speak last, at the end of the hour.” 
He extended the pages. “Here's the speech you’ll make.” His eyes 
said the rest: they said that his choice of words had not been 
accidental. 

Dr. Stadler took the pages, but held them between the tips of two 
straight fingers, as one might hold a scrap of waste paper about to 
be tossed aside. “I haven’t asked you to appoint yourself as my ghost 
writer,” he said. The sarcasm of the voice gave Ferris his clue: this 
was not a moment for sarcasm. 

“I couldn't have allowed your invaluable time to be taken up by 
the writing of radio speeches,” said Dr. Fern's. “1 felt certain that 
you would appreciate it.” He said it in a tone of spurious politeness 
intended to be recognized as spurious, the tone of tossing to a beggar 
the alms of face-saving. 

Dr Stadlcr’s answer disturbed him: Dr. Stadler did not choose to 
answer or to glance down at the manuscript. 

“Lack of faith.” a beefy speaker was snarling an the platform, in 
the tone of a street brawl, “lack of faith is the only thing we got to 
fear! If we have faith in the plans of our leaders, why, the plans will 
work and we’ll all have prosperity and ease and plenty. It’s the fel- 
lows who go around doubting and destroying our morale, it's they 
who’re keeping us in shortages and misery. But we're not going to 
let them do it much longer, we’re here to protect the people— and 
if any of those doubting smarties come around, believe you me, we’ll 
take care of them!” 

“It would be unfortunate,” said Dr. Ferris in a soft voice, “to 
arouse popular resentment against the State Science Institute at an 
explosive time like the present. There’s a great deal of dissatisfaction 
and unrest in the country — and il people should misunderstand the 
nature of the new invention, they’re liable to vent their rage on all 
scientists. Scientists have never been popular with the masses.” 

“Peace,” a tall, willowy woman was sighing into the microphone, 
“this invention is a great, new instrument of peace. It will protect 
us from the aggressive designs of selfish enemies, it will allow us to 
breathe freely and to learn to love our fellow men.” She had a bony 
face w'ith a mouth embittered at cocktail parties, and wore a flowing 
pale blue gown, suggesting the concert garment of a harpist. “It may 
well be considered as that miracle whichlwas thought impossible in 
history — the dream of the ages — the linitl synthesis of science and 
love!” 

Dr. Stadler looked at the faces in the grandstands. They were 
sitting quietly now, they were listening, bat their eyes had an ebbing 

758 



look of twilight, a look of fear in the process of being accepted as 
permanent, the look of raw wounds being dimmed by the veil of 
infection. They knew, as he knew it, that they were the targets of 
the shapeless funnels protruding from the mushroom building’s 
dome — and he wondered in what manner they were now extinguish- 
ing their minds and escaping that knowledge; he knew that the words 
they were eager to absorb and believe were the chains slipping in 
to hold them, like the goats, securely within the range of those fun- 
nels. They were eager to believe; he saw the tightening lines of their 
lips, he saw the occasional glances of suspicion they threw at their 
neighbors— as if the horror that threatened them was not the sound 
ray, but the men who would make them acknowledge it as horror. 
Their eyes were veiling over, but the remnant look of a wound was 
a cry for help. 

"Why do you think they think?" said Dr. Ferris softly. "Reason 
is the scientist’s only weapon-- and reason has no power over men, 
has it? At a time like ours, with the country falling apart, with the 
mob driven by blind desperation to the edge of open riots and vio- 
lence-order must be maintained by any means available. What can 
we do when w r e have to deal with people?" 

Di. Stadicr did not answer. 

A fat, jellied woman, with an inadequate brassiere under a dark, 
peispiration-stained dress, was saying into the microphone — Dr. 
Stadicr could not believe it at first — that the new invention was to 
be greeted with particular gratitude by the mothers of the country. 

Dr. Stadlei turned away; watching him, Ferris could see nothing 
but the noble line ol the high forehead and the deep cut of bitterness 
at the corner of the mouth. 

Suddenly, without context or warning. Robert Stadler whirled to 
face him. It was like a spurt of blood from a sudden crack in a 
wound that had almost closed: Stadlei 's face was open, open in pain, 
m horror, in sincerity, as it, for that moment, both he and Ferris 
were human beings, while he moaned with incredulous despair: 

‘in a civili/cd century. Ferris, in a civilized century!" 

Dr. Ferris took his time to produce and prolong a soft chuckle. "1 
don't know what you're talking about." he answered in the tone of 
a quotation. 

Dr. Stadler lowered his eyes. 

When Ferris spoke again, his voice had the faintest edge of a tone 
which Stadler could not define, except that it did not belong in any 
civilized discussion: "It would be unfortunate if anything were to 
happen to jeopardize the State Science Institute. It would be mast 
unfortunate if the Institute were to be closed —or if any one of us 
were to be forced to leave it. Where would we go? Scientists are 
an inordinate luxury these days — and there aren’t many people or 
establishments left who’re able to afford necessities, let alone luxu- 
ries. There are no doors left open to us. We wouldn’t be welcome 
in the research department of an industrial concern, such as — let us 
say — Rearden Steel. Resides, if we should happen to make enemies, 
the same enemies would be feared by any person tempted to employ 
our talents. A man like Rearden would have fought for us. Would 

759 



a man tike Orren Boyle? But this is purely theoretical speculation, 
because, as a matter of practical fact, all private establishments of 
scientific research have been dosed by law — by Directive 10-289, 
issued, as you might not realize, by Mr Wesley Mouch. Are you 
.thinking, perhaps, of universities? They are in the same position. 
They can't afford to make enemies. Who would speak up for us? I 
believe that some such man as Hugh Akston would have come to 
our defense — but to think of that is to be guilty of an anachronism. 
He belonged to a different age. The conditions set up in our social 
and economic reality have long since made his continued existence 
impossible. And l don't think that Dr, Simon Pritchett, or the gener- 
ation reared under his guidance, would be able or willing to defend 
us. I have never believed in the efficacy of idealists — have you? — and 
this is no age for impractical idealism. If anyone wished to oppose a 
government policy, how would he make himself heard? Through 
these gentlemen of the press, Dr. Stadler? Through this microphone? 
Is there an independent newspaper left in the country? An uncon- 
trolled radio station? A private piece of property, for that matter — 
or a personal opinion?” The tone of the voice was obvious now: it 
was the tone of a thug. “A personal opinion is the one luxury that 
nobody can afford today.” 

Dr. Stadler's lips moved stiffly, as stiffly as the muscles of the 
goats. “You are speaking to Robert Stadler.” 

“I have not forgotten that. It is precisely because 1 have not forgot- 
ten it that I am speaking, ‘Robert Stadler’ is an illustrious name, 
which 1 would hate lo see destroyed. But what is an illustrious name 
nowadays? In whose eyes?” His arm swept over the grandstands. 
“In the eyes of people such as you see around you? If they will 
* believe, when so told, that an instrument of death is a tool of pros- 
perity — would they not believe it if they were told that Robert 
Stadler is a traitor and an enemy of the State? Would you then rely 
on the fact that this is not true? Are you thinking of truth, Dr. 
Stadler? Questions of truth do not enter into social issues. Principles 
have no influence on public affairs. Reason has no power over 
human beings. Logic is impotent. Morality is superfluous. Do not 
answer me now, Dr. Stadler. You will answer me over the micro- 
phone. You’re the next speaker.” 

Looking off at the dark strip of the farm in the distance. Dr. 
Stadler knew that what he felt was terror, but he would not permit 
himself to know its nature. He, who had been able to study the 
particles and subparticles of cosmic space, would not permit himself 
to examine his feeling and to know that it was made of three parts: 
one part was terror of a vision that seemed to stand before his eyes, 
the vision of the inscription cut, in his hoiior, over the door of the 
Institute: “To the fearless mind, to the inviclatc truth” — another part 
was plain, brute, animal fear of physical destruction, a humiliating 
fear which, in the civilized world of his yojuth, he had not expected 
ever to experience — and the third was thd terror of the knowledge 
that by betraying the first, one delivers dneself into the realm of 
the second. 

He walked toward the speaker's scaffold, his steps firm and slow, 

760 



his head lifted, the manuscript of the speech held crumpled in his 
fingers. It looked like a walk to mount either a pedestal or a guillo- 
tine. As the whole of a man’s life flashes before him in his dying 
moment, so he walked to the sound of the announcer’s voice reading 
to the country the list of Robert Stadler’s achievements and career. 
A faint convulsion ran over Robert Stadler's face at the words: 
“ — former head of the Department of Physics of the Patrick Henry 
University.” He knew, distantly, not as if the knowledge were within 
him, but as if it were within some person he was leaving behind, 
that the crowd was about to witness an act of destruction more 
terrible than the destruction of the farm. 

He had mounted the first three steps of the scaffold, when a young 
newsman tore forward, ran to him and, from below, seized the railing 
to stop him. “Dr. Stadler!” he cried in a desperate whisper. “Tell 
them the truth! Tell them that you had nothing to do with it! Tell 
them what sort of infernal machine it is and for what purpose it’s 
intended to be used! Tell the country what sort of people are trying 
to rule it! Nobody can doubt your word! Tell them the truth! Save 
us! You’re the only one who can!” 

Dr. Stadler looked down at him. He was young: his movements 
and voice had that swift, sharp clarity which belongs to competence; 
among his aged, corrupt, favor-ridden and pull-created colleagues, 
he had managed to achieve the rank of elite of the political press, 
by means and in the role of a last, irresistible spark of ability. His 
eyes had the look of an eager, unfrightened intelligence; they were 
the kind of eyes Dr Stadler had seen looking up at him from the 
benches of classrooms. He noticed that this boy's eyes were hazel; 
they had a tinge of green. 

Dr. Stadler turned his head and saw that Ferris had come rushing 
to his side, like a servant or a jailer. “I do not expect to be insulted 
by disloyal young punks with treasonable motives.” said Dr. Stadler 
loudly. 

Dr. Ferris whirled upon the young man and snapped, his face out 
of control, distorted by rage at the unexpected and unplanned, “Give 
me your press card and your work permit r ’ 

“1 am proud,” Dr. Stadler read into the microphone and into the 
attentive silence of a nation, “that my years of work in the service 
of science have brought me the honor of placing into the hands of 
our great leader. Mr. Thompson, a new instrument with an incalcula- 
ble potential for a civilizing and liberating influence upon the mind 
of man. . . 

* * 

The sky had the stagnant breath of a furnace and the streets of 
New York were like pipes running, not with air and light, but with 
melted dust. Dagny stood on a street corner, where the airport bus 
had left her, looking at the city in passive astonishment. The build- 
ings seemed worn by weeks of summer heat, but the people seemed 
worn by centuries of anguish. She stood watching them, disarmed by 
an enormous sense of unreality. 

That sense of unreality had been her only feeling since the early 
hours of the morning — since the moment when, at the end of an 

761 



empty highway, she had walked into an unknown town and stopped 
the first passer-by to ask where she was, 

“Watsonville,” he answered. “What state, please?” she asked. The 
man glanced at her, said, “Nebraska," and walked hastily away. She 
smiled mirthlessly, knowing that he wondered where she had come 
from and that no explanation he could imagine would be as fantastic 
as the truth. Yet it was Watsonville that seemed fantastic to her, as 
she walked through its streets to the railroad station. She had lost 
the habit of observing despair as the normal and dominant aspect 
of human existence, so normal as to become unnoticed— and the 
sight of it struck her in all of its senseless futility. She was seeing 
the brand of pain and fear on the faces of people, and the look of 
evasion that refuses to know it — they seemed to be going through 
the motions of some enormous pretense, acting out a ritual to ward 
off reality, letting the earth remain unseen and their lives unlived, 
in dread of something namelessly forbidden— yet the forbidden was 
the simple act of looking at the nature of their pain and questioning 
their duty to bear it. She was seeing it so clearly that she kept want- 
ing to approach strangers, to shake them, to laugh in their faces and 
to cry, “Snap out of it!” 

There was no reason for people to be as unhappy as that, she 
thought, no reason whatever . . . and then she remembered that 
reason was the one power they had banished from their existence 

She boarded a Taggart train for the nearest aii field; she did not 
identify herself to anyone: it seemed irrelevant. She sat at the win- 
dow o! a coach, like a stranger who has to learn the incomprehensi- 
ble language of those around her. She picked up a discarded 
newspaper; she managed, with ellort, to understand what was writ- 
ten, but not why it should ever have been written: it ail seemed so 
childishly senseless. She stared in astonishment at a paragiaph in a 
syndicated column from New York, which stated overemphatically 
that Mr. James Taggart wished it to be known that his sister had 
died in an airplane ctash, any unpatriotic rumors to the contrary 
notwithstanding. Slowly, she remembered Directive 10-289 and real- 
ized that Jim was embarrassed by the public suspicion that she had 
vanished as a deserter. 

The wording of the paragraph suggested that her disappearance 
had been a prominent public issue, not yet dropped. There wete 
other suggestions of it: a mention of Miss Taggart’s tragic death, in 
a story about the growing number of plane crashes — and, on the 
back page, an ad, offering a $100,000 reward to the person who 
would find the wreckage of her plane, signed by Henry Reardon. 

The last gave her a stab of urgency; the test seemed meaningless. 
Then, slowly, she realized that her return v^as a public event which 
would be taken as big news. She felt a lethargic weariness at the 
prospect of a dramatic homecoming, of facing Jim and the press, of 
witnessing the excitement. She wished the^ would get it over with 
in her absence. 

At the airfield, she saw a small-town reporter interviewing some 
departing officials. She waited till he had finished, then she ap- 
proached him, extended her credentials and said quietly, to the gap- 

762 



ing stare of his eyes, ‘Tm Dagny Taggart. Would you make it known, 
please, that I'm alive and that I’ll he in New York this afternoon?’' 
The plane was about to take oft and she escaped the necessity of 
answering questions. 

She watched the prairies, the rivers, the towns slipping past at 
an untouchable distance below — and she noted that the sense of 
detachment one lecls when looking at the earth from a plane was 
the same sense she felt when looking at people: only her distance 
from people seemed longer. 

The passengers were listening to some radio broadcast, which ap- 
peared to be important; judging by their earnest attentiveness. She 
caught brief snatches ot fraudulent voices talking about some sort 
oi new invention that was to bring some undefined benefits to some 
undefined public’s welfare. The words were obviously chosen to con- 
vey no specific meaning whatever; she wondered how one could pre- 
tend that one was hearing a speech; yet that was what the passengers 
were doing: They were going through the performance of a child 
who, not yet able to read, holds a book open and spells out anything 
he wishes to spell, pretending that it is contained m the incomprehen- 
sible black lines But the child, she thought, knows that he is playing 
a game; these people pretend to themselves that they are not pre- 
tending; they know no other state of existence. 

The sense of unreality remained as her only feeling, when she 
landed, when she escaped a crowd of reporters without being seen -- 
by avoiding the taxi stands and leaping into the airport bus — when 
she rode on the bus, then stood on a street coiner, looking at New 
York She felt as if she were seeing an abandoned city. 

She felt no sense of homecoming, when she entered her apartment; 
the place seemed to be a convenient machine that she could use for 
some purpose of no significance whatever. 

But she felt a quickened touch of energy, like the first break in a 
log— -a touch of meaning -when she picked up the telephone re- 
ceiver and called Rearden's office in Pennsylvania. 

“Oh, Miss Taggart . . Miss Taggart!" said, in a joyous moan, the 
voice of the severe, unemotional Miss Ives. 

“Hello. Miss Ives, I haven’t startled you. have I? You knew that 
l was alive?" 

“Oh yes! I heard it on the radio this morning." 

“Is Mr. Ren den in his office 0 " 

“No, Miss Taggart. He . . . he’s m the Rocky Mountains, seaiching 
for . . . that is , . 

“Yes, I know. Do you know where we can reach him?" 

“I expect to hear from him at any moment. He’s stopping in Los 
Gatos, Colorado, right now. I phoned him. the moment 1 heard the 
news, but he was out and 1 left a message for him to call me. You 
see, he’s out flying, most of the day . . . but he’ll call me when he 
comes back to the hotel." 

"What hotel is it?" 

"The Eldorado Hotel, in Los Gatos." 

"Thank you. Miss Ives." She was about to hang up. 

"Oh, Miss Taggart!" 


763 



"Yes?” 

“What was it that happened to you? Where were you?” 

“I , . . HI teJI you when I see you. I'm in New York now. When 
Mr. Rcarden calls, tell him please that I'll be in my office.” 

“Yes, Miss Taggart.” 

She hung up, but her hand remained on the receiver, clinging to 
her first contact with a matter that had importance. She looked at 
her apartment and at the city in the window, feeling reluctant to 
sink again into the dead fog of the meaningless. 

She raised the receiver and called Los Gatos. 

“Eldorado Hotel,” said a woman's drowsily resentful voice, 

“Would you take a message for Mr. Henry Rearden? Ask him, 
when he comes in, to—” 

“Just a minute, please,” drawled the voice, in the impatient tone 
that resents any effort as an imposition. 

She heard the clicking of switches, some buzzing, some breaks of 
silence and then a man’s clear, firm voice answering: “Hello?” It 
was Hank Rearden 

She stared at the receiver as at the muzzle of a gun. feeling 
trapped, unable to breathe. 

“Hello?” he repeated. 

“Hank is that you?” 

She heard a low sound, more a sigh than a gasp, and then the 
long, empty crackling of the wire 

“Hank!” There was no answer. “Hank!” she screamed in terror. 

She thought she heard the effort of a breath— then she heard a 
whisper, which was not a question, but a statement saying every- 
thing: “Dagny.” 

“Hank. I’m sorry — oh, darling. I'm sorry! — didn’t you know?” 

“Where are you, Dagny?” 

“Arc you all right 9 ” 

“Of course.” J 

“Didn’t you know that I was back and . . and alive?” 

“No . . I didn’t know it.” 

“Oh God, I’m sorry I called, l — ” 

“What are you talking about? Dagny, where are you 9 ” 

“In New York. Didn't you hear about it on the radio?” 

“No. I’ve just come in.” 

“Didn’t they give you a message to call Miss Ives?” 

“No.” 

“Arc you all right?” 

“Now?” she heard his soft, low chuckle. She was hearing the sound 
of unreleased laughter, the sound of youth* growing in his voice with 
every word. “When did you come back?” ; 

“This morning.” 

“Dagny, where were you?” , 

She did not answer at once. “My plane (trashed,” she said. “In the 
Rockies. I was picked up by some people who helped me, but l 
could not send word to anyone.” 

The laughter went out of his voice. “As bad as that?” 

764 



“Oh ... oh, the crash? No, it wasn’t bad. I wasn’t hurt. Not 
seriously.” 

“Then why couldn’t you send word?” 

“There were no . . . no means of communication.” 

“Why did it take you so long to get back?” 

“f . . . can’t answer that now.” 

“Dagny, were you in danger?” 

The half-smiling, half-bitter tone ol her voice was almost regret, 
as she answered, “No.” 

“Were you held prisoner?” 

“No — not really.” 

“Then you could have returned sooner, but didn’t?” 

“That’s true — but that’s all 1 can tell you.” 

“Where were you, Dagny?” 

“Do you mind if we don’t talk about it now? Let's wait until l 
see you.” 

“Of course 1 won’t ask any questions. Just tell me: are you safe 
now?” 

“Safe? Yes.” 

“1 mean, have you suffered any permanent injuries or con- 
sequences?” 

She answered, with the same sound of a cheerless smile, “Injur- 
ies- -no. Hank I don’t know, as to the permanent consequences.” 

“Will you still be in New York tonight?” 

“Why, yes. I'm . I'm back for good.” 

“Aie you *” 

“Why do you ask that?” 

“I don’t know. 1 guess I’m too used to what it’s like when . . . 
when I can’t find you.” 

“I’m hack.” 

“Yes, HI see you in a few horns” His voice broke off. as if the 
sentence were too enormous to believe. “In a few hours,” he re- 
peated firmly. 

“I'll be here.” 

“Dagny — 

“Yes?” 

He chuckled softly. “No, nothing. Just wanted to hear your voice 
awhile longer Forgive me. 1 mean, not now. 1 mean, I don’t want 
to say anything now.” 

“Hank,' I—” 

“When I see you, my darling. So long ” 

She stood looking at the silent receiver. For the first time since 
her return, she fell pain, a violent pain, but it made her alive, because 
it was worth feeling. 

She telephoned her secretary at Taggart Transcontinental, to say 
briefly that she would be in the office in half an hour. 

The statue of Nathaniel Taggart was real— when she stood facing 
it in the concouise ot the Terminal. It seemed to her that they were 
alone in a vast, echoing temple, with fog coils of formless ghosts 
weaving and vanishing around them. She stood still, looking up at 

765 



the statue, as for a bnet moment of dedication. I’m back-»~were the 
only words she had to offer. 

“Dagny Taggart 0 was still the inscription on the frosted glass panel 
of the door to her office. The look on the faces of her staff, as she 
entered the anteroom, was the look of drowning persons at the sight 
of a lifeline. She saw Eddie Willers standing at his desk in his glass 
enclosure, with some man before him. Eddie made a move in her 
direction, but stopped; he looked imprisoned. She let her glance 
greet every face in turn, smiling at them gently as at doomed chil- 
dren, then walked toward Eddie’s desk. 

Eddie was watching her approach as if he were seeing nothing 
else in the world, but his rigid posture seemed designed to pretend 
that he was listening to the man before him. 

“Motive power?’’ the man was saying in a voice that had a 
brusque, staccato snap and a slurred, nasal drawl, together. “There’s 
no problem about motive power You just take-” 

“Hello.” said Eddie softly, with a muted smile, as to a distant 
vision. 

The man turned to glance at her. He had a yellow complexion, 
curly hair, a hard face made of soft muscles, and the revolting hand- 
someness belonging to the esthetic standards of barroom corners; his 
blurred brown eyes had the empty flatness of glass. 

“Miss Taggart,” said Eddie, in a resonant tone of severity, the 
tone of slapping the man into the manners of a drawing room he 
had never entered, “may 1 present Mr, Meigs > ” 

“How d’ do,” said the man without interest, then turned to Eddie 
and proceeded, as if she were not present “You just take the Comet 
off the schedule for tomorrow and Tuesday, and shoot the engines 
-to Ari/ona for the grapefruit special, with the rolling stock from the 
Scranton coal run l mentioned. Send the orders out at once.” 

“You’ll do nothing of the kind!” she gasped, too incredulous to 
be angry. 

Eddie did not answer. 

Meigs glanced at her with what would have been astonishment if 
his eyes were capable of registering a reaction “Send the orders,” 
he said to Eddie, with no emphasis, and walked out. 

Eddie was jotting notations on a piece of paper. 

“Are you crazy?” she asked. 

He raised his eyes to her, as though exhausted by hours of beating. 
“We’ll have to, Pagny,” he said, his voice dead. 

“What is that?” she asked, pointing at the outer door that had 
closed on Mr. Meigs. 

“The Director of Unification.” 

"What?” 

“The Washington representative, in charge of the Railroad Unifi- 
cation Plan.” 

“What’s that?” 

“ft’s . . . Oh, wait, Dagny, arc you all right? Were you hurt? Was 
it a plane crash?” > 

She had never imagined what the face of Eddie Willers would 
look like in the process of aging, but she was seeing it now — aging 

' 766 



at thirty-five and within the span of one month, it was not a matter 
of texture or wrinkles, it was the same face with the same muscles, 
but saturated by the withering look of resignation to a pain accepted 
as hopeless. 

She smiled, gently and confidently, in understanding, in dismissal 
of all problems, and said, extending her hand, “All right, Eddie, 
Hello.” 

He took her hand and pressed it to his lips, a thing he had never 
done before, his manner neither daring nor apologetic, but simply 
and openly personal. 

“It was a plane crash,” she said, “and, Eddie, so that you won’t 
worry. I'll tell you the truth: 1 wasn't hurt, not seriously. But that’s 
not the story I’m going to give to the press and to all the others. So 
you're never to mention it.” 

“Of course ” 

“I had no way to communicate with anyone, but not because I 
was hurt. It’s all I can tell you. Eddie. Don't ask me where 1 was or 
why it took me so long to return.” 

“I won't.” 

"Now tell me, what is the Railroad Unification Plan?” 

“It's . . . Oh, do you mind? —let Jim tell you. He will, soon enough. 
1 just don't have the stomach — unless you want me to,” he added, 
with a conscientious effort at discipline. 

“No, you don't have to. Just tell me whether I understood that 
Unilicator correctly: he wants you to cancel the Comet for two days 
in order to give her engines to a grapefruit special in Arizona?” 

“ I hat’s right ” 

“And he’s cancelled a coal train in order to get cars to lug 
grapefruit?” 

“Yes.” 

“ Grapefruit ?*' 

That’s right.” 

“Why?” 

“Dagny, 'why' is a word nobody uses any longer.” 

After a moment, she asked, “Have you any guess about the 
reason?” 

“Guess? I don’t have to guess. 1 know.'’ 

“All light, what is it?" 

“'Hie grapefruit special is tor the Smather brothers. The Smather 
brothers bought a fruit ranch in Arizona a year ago, from a man 
who went bankrupt under the Equalization of Opportunity Bill. He 
had owned the ranch for thirty years. The Smather brothers were in 
the punch board business the year before. They bought the ranch by 
means of a loan from Washington under a project for the reclamation 
of distressed areas, such as Arizona. The Smather brothers have 
friends in Washington.” 

“Well?” 

“Dagny, everybody knows it. Everybody knows how train sched- 
ules have been run in the past three weeks, and why some districts 
and some shippers get transportation, while others don’t. What we’re 
not supposed to do is say that we know it. We’re supposed to pretend 

767 



to believe that ‘public welfare’ is the only reason for any decision — 
and that the public welfare of the city of New York requires the 
immediate delivery of a large quantity of grapefruit.” He paused, 
then added, ‘The Director of Unification is sole judge of the public 
welfare and has sole authority over the allocation of any motive 
power and rolling stock on any railroad anywhere in the United 
States.” 

There was a moment of silence. “I see,” she said. In another mo- 
ment, she asked, “What has been done about the Winston tunnel?” 

“Oh, that was abandoned three weeks ago. They never unearthed 
the trains. The equipment gave out.” 

“What has been done about rebuilding the old line around the 
tunnel?” 

“That was shelved.” 

“Then are we running any transcontinental traffic?” 

He gave her an odd glance. “Oh yes,” he said bitterly. 

“Through the detour of the Kansas Western?” 

“No.” 

“Eddie, what has been happening here in the past month?” 

He smiled as it his words were an ugly confession “We’ve been 
making money in the past month,” he answered. 

She saw the outer door open and Janies Taggart come in, accom- 
panied by Mr. Meigs, “Eddie, do you want to be present at the 
conference?” she asked. “Or would you rather miss this one?” 

“No. I want to he present.” 

Jim’s face looked like a crumpled piece of paper, though ils soft, 
puffed flesh had acquired no additional lines. 

“Dagny. there's a lot ot things to discuss, a lot oi important 
changes which—” he said shrilly, his voice rushing in ahead of his 
person. “Oh, I’m glad to see you back. I’m happy that you're alive,” 
he added impatiently, remembering. “Now there are some urgent- 

“Let’s go to my office,” she said. 

Her office was like a historical reconstruction, restored and main- 
tained by Eddie Willers. Her map. her calendar, (he picture of Nat 
Taggart were on the walls, and no trace was left ot the Clifton 
Locey era. 

T understand that l am still the Operating Vice-President of this 
railroad?" she asked, sitting down at her desk. 

“You are,” said Taggart hastily, accusingly, almost defiantly. “You 
certainly are — and don’t you forget it — you haven't quit, you’re 
still --have you?” 

“No, l haven’t quit.” 

“Now the most urgent thing to do is to tell that to the press, tell 
them that you’re back on the job and where you were and — and, by 
the way, where were you?” 

“Eddie.” she said, “will you make a n<|tc on this and send it to 
the press? My plane developed engine trouble while I was flying 
over the Rocky Mountains to the Taggart Tunnel. 1 lost my way, 
looking for an emergency landing, and clashed in an uninhabited 
mountain section — of Wyoming, f was found by an old shccpherder 
and his wife, who took me to their cabin, deep in the wilderness, 

768 



fifty miles away from the nearest settlement. I was badly injured and 
remained unconscious for most of two weeks. The old couple had 
no telephone, no radio, no means of communication or transporta- 
tion, except an old truck that broke down when they attempted to 
use it. I had to remain with them until l recovered sufficient strength 
to walk. 1 walked the fifty miles to the foothills, then hitch-hiked my 
way to a Taggart station in Nebraska.” 

“I see,” said Taggart. “Well, that’s fine. Now when you give the 
press interview — ” 

‘Tin not going to give any press interviews.” 

"What? But they’ve been calling me all day! They’re waiting! It’s 
essential!” He had an air of panic, "ft's most crucially essential!” 

“Who’s been calling you all day?” 

“People in Washington and . . . and others . . . They're waiting 
for your statement.” 

She pointed at Eddie’s notes. “There's my statement.” 

“But that's not enough! You must say that you haven’t quit.” 

“That’s obvious, isn’t it? I'm hack,” 

“You must say something about it.” 

“Such as what?” 

“Something personal.” 

“To whom?” 

“To the country. People were worried about you. You must reas- 
sure them.” 

“The story will reassure them, if anyone was worried about me.” 

“That’s not what 1 mean!” 

“Well, what do you mean?” 

“1 mean — ” He stopped, his eyes avoiding hers. “1 mean — ” He 
sat, searching for words, cracking his knuckles. 

Jim was going to pieces, she thought; the jerky impatience, the 
shrillness, the aura of panic were new: crude outbreaks of a tone of 
ineffectual menace had replaced his pose of cautious smoothness. 

“1 mean—” He was searching for words to name his meaning 
without naming it, she thought, to make her understand that which 
he did not want to be understood. “1 mean, the public — ” 

“I know what you mean.” she said. “No, Jim, I’m not going to 
reassure the public about the stale of our industry.” 

“Now you’re — ” 

“The public had better be as unreassured as it has the wits to be. 
Now proceed to business,” 

“I—” 

“Proceed to business, Jim.” 

He glanced at Mr. Meigs. Mr. Meigs sat silently, his legs crossed, 
smoking a cigarette. He wore a jacket which was not, but looked 
like, a military uniform. The flesh of his neck bulged over the collar, 
and the flesh of his body strained against the narrow waistline in- 
tended to disguise it. He wore a ring with a large yellow diamond 
that flashed when he moved his stubby fingers. 

“You’ve met Mr. Meigs,” said Taggart, “I’m so glad that the two 
of you will get along well together.” He made an expectant half- 
pause, but received no answer from either. “Mr. Meigs is the repre- 

769 



tentative of the Railroad Unification Plan. You’ll have many oppor- 
tunities to cooperate with him." 

“What is the Railroad Unification Plan?" 

“It is a ... a new national setup that went into effect three weeks 
ago, which you will appreciate and approve of and find extremely 
practical." She marveled at the futility of his method: he was acting 
as if. by naming her opinion in advance, he would make heT unable 
to alter it. "It is an emergency setup which has saved the country’s 
transportation system." 

"What is the plan?" 

“You realize, of course, the insui mountable difficulties of any sort 
of construction job during this period of emergency It is — temporar- 
ily — impossible to lav new track Therefore, the country's top prob- 
lem is to preserve the transportation industry as a whole . to preserve 
its existing plant and all of its existing facilities The national survival 
requires — “ 

"What is the plan 9 " 

"As a policy of national survival, the railroads of the country have 
been unified into a single team, pooling their resources. All of their 
gross revenue is turned over to the Railroad Pool Board in Washing- 
ton, which acts as trustee for the industry as a whole, and divides 
the total income among the various railroads, according to a . . a 
more modern principle of distribution '* 

"What principle?" 

“Now don’t worry, property rights have been fully preserved and 
protected, they've merely been given a new form. Hvery railroad 
retains independent responsibility for its own operations, its train 
schedules and the maintenance of its track and equipment. As its 
contribution to the national pool, every railroad permits any other, 
when conditions so require, to use its track and facilities without 
charge. At the end of the year, the Pool Board distributes the total 
gross income, and every individual railroad is paid, not on the hap- 
hazard, old-fashioned basis of the number of trains run or the tonnage 
of freight carried, but on the basis ol its need — that is, the preserva- 
tion of its track being its mam need, every individual railroad is paid 
according to the mileage of the track which it owns and maintains." 

She heard the words; she understood the meaning; she was unable 
to make it real — to grant the respect of anger, concern, opposition 
to a nightmare piece of insanity that rested on nothing but people’s 
willingness to pretend to believe that it was sane She felt a numbed 
emptiness — and the sense of being thrown far below the realm where 
moral indignation is pertinent 

“Whose track are we using for our transcontinental traffic?" she 
asked, her voice flat and dry. 

“Why, our own, of course," said Tagg«u nastily, “that is, from 
New York to Bedford, Illinois. We run ou£ trains out of Bedford on 
the track of the Atlantic Southern." 

“To San Francisco?" 

“Well, it’s much faster than that long detour you tried to 
establish." 


770 



“We run our trains without charge for the use of the track?” 

“Besides, your detour couldn’t have lasted, the Kansas Western 
rail was shot, and besides — ” 

“Without charge for the use of the Atlantic Southern track?” 

“Well, we’re not charging them for the use of our Mississippi 
bridge, either.” 

Alter a moment, she asked, “Have you looked at a map?” 

“Sure,” said Meigs unexpectedly. “You own the hugest track mile- 
age ot any railroad in the country. So you’ve got nothing to worry 
about.” 

Eddie Willers burst out laughing. 

Meigs glanced at him blankly. “What's the matter with you?" he 
asked, 

“Nothing,” said Eddie wearily, “nothing." 

“Mr. Meigs,” she said, “if you look at a map, you will see that 
two-thirds of the cost of maintaining a track for our transcontinental 
traffic is given to us free and is paid by our competitor.” 

“Why, sure,” he said, but his eyes narrowed, watching her suspi- 
ciously. as il he were wondering what motive prompted her to so 
explicit a statement. 

“While we’re paid for owning miles of useless track which carries 
no traffic,” she said. 

Meigs understood- -and leaned back as if he had lost all further 
interest in the discussion 

“That's not true!” snapped Taggart “We re running a great num- 
ber of lix«il trains to serve the region of our former transcontinental 
line - through Iowa, Nebraska and Colorado — and, on the other side 
ot the tunnel, through California, Nevada and Utah.” 

“We’re running two locals a day,' said Eddie Willers, in the dry. 
blankly innocent tone of a business report. “Fewer, some places.” 

“What determines (he number of trains which any given railroad 
is obligated to run?” she asked. 

“The public welfare,” said Taggart. 

“The Pool Board,” said Eddie. 

“How many trains have been discontinued in the country in the 
past three weeks?” 

“As a matter of fact.” said Taggart eagerly, “the plan has helped 
to harmonize the industry and to eliminate cutthroat competition,” 

“It has eliminated thirty per cent of the trains run in the country*” 
said Eddie. “The only competition left is in the applications to the 
Board lor permission to cancel trains. The railroad to survive w\|l 
be the one that manages to run no trains at all.” 

“Has anybody calculated how long the Atlantic Southern is ex- 
pected to be able to remain in business?” 

“That’s no skin off your — ” started Meigs. 

“ Please , Cuffy!” cried Taggart. 

“The president of the Atlantic Southern,” said Eddie impassively, 
“has committed suicide.” 

“That had nothing to do with this!” yelled Taggart. “It was over 
a personal matter!” 

She remained silent. She sat, looking at their faces. There was still 

771 



an clement of wonder in the numbed indifference of her mind: Jim 
had always managed to switch the weight of his failures upon the 
strongest plants around him and to survive by destroying them to 
pay for his errors, as he had done with Dan Conway, as he had 
done with the industries of Colorado; but this did not have even the 
rationality ot a looter— this pouncing upon the drained carcass of a 
weaker, a half-bankrupt competitor for a moment's delay, with noth- 
ing but a cracking bone between the pouncer and the abyss. 

The impulse of the habit of reason almost pushed her to speak, 
to argue, to demonstrate the self-evident— but she looked at their 
faces and she saw that they knew it. In some terms different from 
hers, in some inconceivable manner of consciousness, they knew all 
that she could tell them, it was useless to prove to them the irrational 
horror of their course and of its consequences, both Meigs and Tag- 
gart knew it — and the secret ol their consciousness was the means 
by which they escaped the finality of their knowledge. 

“I see,” she said quietly. 

“Well, what would you rather have had me do?” screamed Tag- 
gart. “Give up our transcontinental traffic? Go bankrupt? Turn the 
railroad tnto a miserable East Coast local?” Her two words seemed 
to have hit him worse than any indignant objection; he seemed to 
be shaking with terror at that which the quiet “I see” had acknowl- 
edged seeing. “I couldn’t help it! We had to have a transcontinental 
track! There was no way to get around the tunnel! We had no money 
to pay for any extra costs! Something had to be done! We had to 
have a track*” 

Meigs was looking at him with a glance ot part-astonishment, 
part-disgust. 

“I am not arguing, Jim,” she said dryly. 

“We couldn’t permit a railroad like Taggart Transcontinental to 
crash! It would have been a national catastrophe! We had to think 
of all the cities and industries and shippers and passengers and em- 
ployees and stockholders whose lives depend on us! ft wasn’t just 
for ourselves, it was for the public welfare! Everybody agrees that 
the Railroad Unification Plan is practical! The best-informed—” 

“Jim,” she said, “if you have any further business to discuss with 
me — discuss it.” 

“You’ve never considered the social angle of anything,” he said, 
in a sullen, retreating voice. 

She noticed that this form of pretense was as unreal to Mr, Meigs 
as it was to her, though for an antipodal reason. He was looking at 
Jim with bored contempt. Jim appeared to her suddenly as a man 
who had tried to find a middle course between two poles — Meigs 
and herself — and who was now seeing th^t his course was narrowing 
and that he was to be ground between two straight walls. 

“Mr. Meigs,” she asked, prompted by h touch of bitterly arriused 
curiosity, “what is your economic plan fqr day after tomorrow?” 

She saw his bleary brown eyes focus upon her without expression. 
“YouYe impractical,” he said. 

”It*s perfectly useless to theorize about the future,” snapped Tag- 

772 



gart, "when we have to take care of the emergency of the moment. 
In the long run — " 

"In the long run, we’ll all be dead," said Meigs. 

Then, abruptly, he shot to his feet. "Ill run along, Jim," he said. 
“I’ve got no time to waste on conversations." He added, "You talk 
to her about that matter of doing something to stop all those train 
wrecks— if she’s the little girl who’s such a wizard at railroading." It 
was said inoffensively; he was a man who would not know when he 
was giving offense or taking it. 

“I’ll sec you later, Ouffy." said Taggart, as Meigs walked out with 
no parting glance at any of them. 

Taggart looked at her, expectantly and fearfully, as if dreading her 
comment, yet desperately hoping to hear some woid, any word. 

"Well?” she asked. 

"What do you mean?" 

"Have you anything else to discuss?" 

"Well, I . . He sounded disappointed. "Yes!" he cried, in the 
tone of a desperate plunge. "I have another matter to discuss, the 
most important one of all. the—" 

"Your growing number of train wrecks?" 

"No! Not that." 

"What, then'"' 

"It's . . .that youie going to appear on Beitram Scudder’s radio 
program tonight." 

She leaned back. "Am I?" 

"Dagny, it’s imperative, it’s ciuciul. there’s nothing to be done 
about it, to refuse is out of the question, m times like these one has 
no choice, and—" 

She glanced at her watch. "I’ll give you three minutes to explain — 
it you want to be heard at all. And you'd better speak straight." 

"a\11 right!" he said desperately. "It’s considered most important — 
cm the highest levels, 1 mean Chick Morrison and Wesley Mouch 
and Mr. Thompson, as high as that that you should make a speech 
to the nation, a moi ale-building speech, >ou know, saying that you 
haven’t quit " 

"Why?" 

"Because everybody thought you had! . . . You don't know what's 
been going on lately, but . . but it's sort of uncanny. The country 
is full of minors, all sorts of rumors, about everything, all of them 
dangerous Disruptive, 1 mean. People seem to do nothing but whis- 
per. They don't believe the newspapers, they don't believe the best 
speakers, they believe every vicious, scare -mongering piece of gossip 
that comes Heating aiound. Theie’s no confidence left, no faith, no 
order, no . . . no respect for authority. People . . . people seem to 
be on the verge of panic " 

"Well?" 

"Well, tor one thing, it's the damnable business of all those big 
industrialists who’ve vanished into thin air! Nobody’s been able to 
explain it and it's giving them the jitters. There’s all sorts of hysteri- 
cal stuff being whispered about it. but what they whisper mostly is 
that ‘no decent man will work for those people,' Hiey mean the 

773 



people in Washington, Now do you sec? You wouldn’t .suspect that 
you were so famous, but you are, or you’ve become, ever since your 
plane crash. Nobody believed the plane crash. They all thought you 
had broken the law, that is. Directive 10-289, and deserted. There’s 
a lot of popular . . . misunderstanding of Directive 10-289, a lot 
of . . , well, unrest. Now you see how important it is that you go on 
the air and tell people that it isn’t true that Directive 10-289 is 
destroying industry, that it’s a sound piece of legislation devised for 
everybody’s good, and that if they’ll just be patient a little longer, 
things will improve and prosperity will return. They don’t believe 
any public official any more. You . . . you’re an industrialist, one of 
the few left of the old school, and the only one who’s ever come 
back after they thought you’d gone. You’re known as ... as a 
reactionary who’s opposed to Washington policies. So the people 
will believe you. It would have a great influence on them, it would 
buttress their confidence, it would help their morale. Now do you 
see?” 

He had rushed on. encouraged by the odd look of her face, a look 
of contemplation that was almost a faint half-smile. 

She had listened, hearing, through his words, the sound of Rear- 
den's voice saying to her on a spring evening over a year ago* “They 
need some sort of sanction from us. I don’t know the nature of that 
sanction — but, Dagny, I know that if we value our lives, we must 
not give it to them. If they put you on a torture rack, don’t give it 
to them. Let them destroy your railroad and my mills, but don’t give 
it to them.” 

“Now do you see?” 

“Oh yes, Jim, 1 see!” 

He could not interpret the sound of her voice, it was low, it was 
part-moan, part-chuckle, part-triumph — but it was the first sound of 
emotion to come from her. and he plunged on, with no choice but 
to hope. “1 promised them in Washington that you’d speak! We 
can’t fail them — not in an issue of this kind! We can’t afford to be 
suspected of disloyalty. It’s all arranged. You’ll be the guest speaker 
on Bertram Scudder's program, tonight, at ten-thirty. He's got a 
radio program where he interviews prominent public figures, it’s a 
national hookup, he has a large following, he reaches over twenty 
million people. The office of the Morale Conditioner has — ” 

“The whutV ’ 

“The Morale Conditioner — that’s Chick Morrison — has called me 
three limes, to make sure that nothing would go wrong. They’ve 
issued orders to all the news broadcasters, who’vc been announcing 
it all day, all over the country, telling people to listen to you tonight 
on Bertram Scudder’s hour ” 

He looked at her as if he were demanding both an answer and 
the recognition that her answer was the ejement of least importance 
in these circumstances. She said, “You know what 1 think of the 
Washington policies and of Directive KL&89 ” 

“At a time like this, y/c can’t afford the luxury of thinking!” 

She laughed aloud. 

“But don’t you see that you can’t refuse them now?” he yelled. 

774 



‘'If you don’t appear after all those announcements* it will support 
the rumors, it will amount to an open declaration of disloyalty!” 

“The trap won’t work. Jim.” 

'■What trap?” 

‘ The one you’re always setting up.” 

”1 don't know what you mean!” 

“Yes, you do. You knew- -all ol you knew it— that I would refuse. 
So you pushed me into a public trap, where my refusal would be- 
come an embarrassing scandal for you, more embarrassing than you 
thought I’d dare to cause. You were counting on me to save your 
faces and the necks you stuck out. I won’t save them.” 

“But I promised it!” 

“1 didn't.” 

“But we can t refuse them! Don't you see that they've got us 
hoglied 7 That they’re holding us by the throat? Don't you know 
what they can do to us through this Railroad Pool, or through the 
Unification Board, or through the moratorium on our bonds?” 

“I knew that two years ago.” 

He was shaking; there was some formless, desperate, almost super- 
stitious quality in his terror, out of proportion to the dangers he 
named She felt suddenly certain that it came from something deeper 
than his fear of bureaucratic reprisal, that the reprisal was the only 
identification of u which he would permit himsell to know, a reassur- 
ing identification which had a semblance ol lationality and hid his 
true motive. She felt ceitam that it was not the country’s panic he 
wanted to stave off, but his own— that he. and Chick Morrison and 
Wesley Mouch and all the rest ol the looting crew needed her sanc- 
tion. not to reassure their victims, but to reassure themselves, though 
the allegedly crafty, the allegedly practical idea of deluding their 
victims was the only identification they gave to their own motive and 
their hysterical insistence. With an awed contempt -awed by the 
enormity of the sight — she wondered what inner degradation those 
men had to reach in order to arrive at a level of self-deception where 
they would seek the extorted approval of an unwilling victim as the 
moral sanction thev needed, they who thought that they were merely 
deceiving the world. 

“We have no choice!” he cried “Nobody has any choice!” 

“Get out of here,” she said, her voice very quiet and low. 

Some tonal quality in the sound of her voice struck the note of 
the uneonfessed within him, as i(. never allowing it into words, he 
knew from what knowledge that sound had come. He got out. 

She glanced at Eddie; he looked like a man worn by fighting one 
more of the attacks of disgust which he was learning to endure as a 
chronic condition. 

After a moment, he asked, “Dagny, what became of Quentin Dan- 
iels? You were flying after him, weren't you?” 

“Yes,” she said. “He’s gone.” 

“To the destroyer?” 

The word hit her like a physical blow. It was the first touch of the 
outer world upon that radiant presence which she had kept within 
her all day, as a silent, changeless vision, a private vision, not to be 

775 



affected by any of the things around her, not to be thought about, 
only to be felt as the source of her strength. The, destroyer, she 
realized, was the name of that vision, here, in their world. 

“Yes,” she said dully, with effort, “to the destroyer.” 

Then she dosed her hands over the edge of the desk, to steady 
her purpose and her posture, and said, with the bitter hint of a smile, 
“Well, Eddie, let's sec what two impractical persons, like you and 
me. can do about preventing the train wrecks.” 

It was two hours later— when she was alone at her desk, bent over 
sheets of paper that bore nothing but figures, yet were like a motion- 
picture film unrolling to tell her the whole story of the railroad m 
the past four weeks — that the buzzer rang and her secretary’s voice 
said, “Mrs. Reardon to see you, Miss Taggart.” 

“Mr. Rearden?” she asked incredulously, unable to believe cither. 

“No. Mrs. Rearden.” 

She let a moment pass, then said, “Please ask her to come in.” 

There was some peculiar touch of emphasis in Lillian Rearden’s 
bearing when she entered and walked toward the desk. She wore a 
tailored suit, with a loose, bright bow hanging casualty sidewise for 
a note of elegant incongruity, and a small hat tilted at an angle 
considered smart by virtue of being considered amusing; her face 
was a shade too smooth, her steps a shade too slow, and she walked 
almost as if she were swinging her hips, 

“How do you do. Miss Taggart,” she said in a la/tly gracious voice, 
a drawing-room voice which seemed to strike, in that office, the same 
style of incongruity as her suit and her bow. 

Dagny inclined her head gravely. 

Lillian glanced about the office, her glance had the same style of 
amusement as her hat: an amusement purporting to express maturity 
by the conviction that life could be nothing but ridiculous. 

“Please sit down,” said Dagnv. 

Lillian sat down, relaxing into a confident, gracefully casual pos- 
ture. When she turned her face to Dagny, the amusement was still 
there, but its shading was now different, it seemed to suggest that 
they shared a secret, which would make her presence here seem 
preposterous to the world, but sell evidently logical to the two of 
them. She stressed it by remaining silent. 

“What can 1 do for you 7 ” 

"I came to tell you,” said Lillian pleasantly, "that you will appear 
on Bertram Scudder’s bioadcast tonight.” 

She detected no astonishment in Dagnys lace, no shock, only the 
glance of an engineer studying a motor that makes an incgular 
sound. “I assume,” said Dagny, “that you are fully aware of the 
form of your sentence.” 

“Oh yes!” said Lillian. 

“Then proceed to support it.” 

“I beg your pardon?” 

“Proceed to tell me.” 

Lillian gave a brief little laugh, its fonued brevity betraying that 
this was not quite the attitude she had expected. “1 am sure that no 
lengthy explanation will be necessary,” she said. “You know why 

776 



your appearance on that broadcast is important to those in power, 
I know why you have refused to appear. I know your convictions 
on the subject. You may have attached no importance to it, but you 
do know that my sympathy has always been on the side of the system 
now in power. Therefore, you will understand my interest in the 
issue and my place in it. When your brother told me that you had 
refused, I decided to take a hand m the matter — because, you see, 
l am one of the very few who know that you are not in a position 
to refuse.” 

“I am not one of those few, as yet,” said Dagny. 

Lillian smiled. “Well, yes, 1 must explain a little further. You real- 
ize that your radio appearance will have the same value for those in 
power as — as the action of my husband when he signed the Gift 
Certificate that turned Rearden Metal over to them. You know how 
trcquently and how usefully they have been mentioning it in all of 
their piopaganda.” 

“I didn't know that,” said Dagny sharply. 

“Oh, of course, you have been away for most of the last two 
months, so you might have missed the constant reminder— in the 
press, on the radio, in public speeches — that even Hank Rcardcn 
approves of and supports Directive 10-289, since he has voluntarily 
signed his Metal over to the nation. Even Hank Rearden That dis- 
courages a great many recalcitrants and helps to keep them in line.” 
She leaned back and asked in the tone of a casual aside, “Have you 
ever asked him why he signed?” 

Dagny did not answer: she did not seem to hear that it was a 
question: she sat still and her lace was expressionless, but her eyes 
seemed loo large and they were fixed on Lillian’s, as if she were 
nmv intent upon nothing but hearing Lillian to the end. 

“No. I didn’t think you knew' it. I didn’t think that he would 
ever tell you,” said Lillian, her voice smoother, as it recognizing the 
signposts and sliding comfortably down the anticipated course “Yet 
you must learn the reason that made him sign— -because it is the 
same reason that will make you appear on Bertram Scudder’s broad- 
cast tonight.” 

She paused, wishing to be urged. Dagny waited. 

“It is a reason,” said Lillian, “which should please you— as far as 
my husband’s action is concerned. Consider what that signature 
meant to him Rearden Metal was his greatest achievement, the sum- 
mation of the best in his hte. the final symbol ot his pride— and my 
husband, as you have reason to know, is an extremely passionate 
man, his pride in himself being, perhaps, his greatest passion. Rear- 
den Metal was more than an achievement to him, it was the symbol 
of his ability to achieve, of his independence, of his snuggle, of his 
rise It was his propel tv, his by right — and you know what rights 
mean to a man as strict as he, and what property means to a man 
as possessive. He would have gladly died to defend it. rather than 
surrender it to the men he despised. This is what it meant to him — 
and this is what he gave up. You will be glad to know that he gave 
it up for your sake. Miss Taggart. For the sake of your reputation 
and your honor. He signed the Gilt Certificate surrendering Rearden 

777 



Metal — under the threat that the adultery he was carrying on with 
you would be exposed to the eyes of the world. Oh yes, we had full 
proof of it. in every intimate detail. I believe that you hold a philoso- 
phy which disapproves of sacrifice — but in this case, you are most 
certainly a woman, so Vm sure that you will feel gratification at the 
magnitude of the sacrifice a man has made for the privilege of using 
your body. You have undoubtedly taken great pleasure in the nights 
which he spent in your bed. You may now take pleasure in the 
knowledge of what those nights have cost him. And since — you like 
bluntness, don't you. Miss Taggart?- -since your chosen status is that 
of a whore. 1 take my hat off to you in regard to the price you 
exacted, which none of your sisters could ever have hoped to match/' 

Lillian’s voice had kept growing reluctantly sharper, like a drill- 
head that kept breaking by being unable to find the line of the fault 
in the stone. Dagny was still looking at her, but the intensity had 
vanished from Dagny ’s eyes and posture. Lillian wondered why she 
felt as il Dagny ’s face were hit by a spotlight. She could detect no 
particular expression, it was simply a face in natural repose- -and the 
clarity seemed to come from its structure, from the precision of its 
sharp planes, the firmness of the mouth, the steadiness of the eyes. 
She could not decipher the expression of the eyes, it seemed incon- 
gruous, if resembled the calm, not of a woman, but of a scholar, 
it had that peculiar, luminous quality which is the tearlessness ot 
satisfied knowledge. 

‘it was I," said Lillian softly, “who informed the bureaucrats about 
my husband’s adultery.” 

Dagny noticed the first flicker ot feeling m Lillian’s lifeless eyes: 
it resembled pleasure, but so distantly that it looked like sunlight 
reflected from the dead surface of the moon to the stagnant water 
of a swamp; il flickered for an instant and went. 

“It was 1,” said Lillian, “who took Reardcn Metal away from 
him.” It sounded almost like a plea. 

It was not within the power of Dagny ’s consciousness ever to un- 
derstand that plea or to know what response Lillian had hoped to 
find; she knew only that she had not found it, when she heaul the 
sudden shrillness of Lillian's voice. “Have you understood me?" 

“Yes.” 

“Then you know what I demand and why you'll obey me. You 
thought you were invincible, you and he, didn't you?’* The voice was 
attempting smoothness, but it was jerking unevenly. “You have al- 
ways acted on no will but your own — a luxury' I have not been able 
to afford. For once and in compensation, I will sec you acting on 
mine. You can’t fight me. You can’t buy your way out of it. with 
those dollars which you’re able to make and I'm not. Hide's no 
profit you can offer me — I’m devoid of greed. I'm not paid by the 
bureaucrats for doing this — I am doing |t without gain. Without gain. 
Do you understand me?” f 

“Yes.” 

“Then no further explanations are necessary, only the reminder 
that all the factual evidence — hotel registers, jewelry bills and stuff 
like that — is still in the possession of fhe right persons and will be 

778 



broadcast on every radio program tomorrow, unless you appear on 
one radio program tonight. Is this clear?’' 

“Yes.” 

•‘Now what is your answer?” She saw the luminous scholar-eyes 
looking at her, and suddenly she felt as if too much of her were seen 
and as if she were not seen at all. 

“I am glad that you have told me,” said Dagny. “I will appear on 
Bertram Scudder’s broadcast tonight.” 

* * 

There was a beam of white light beating down upon the glittering 
metal of a microphone— in the center of a glass cage imprisoning 
her with Bertram Scudder. The sparks of glitter were greenish-blue; 
the microphone was made of Rearden Metal. 

Above them, beyond a sheet of glass, she could distinguish a booth 
with two rows of faces looking down at her: the lax, anxious face of 
James Taggart, with Lillian Rearden beside him, her hand resting 
reassuringly on his arm — a man who had arrived by plane from 
Washington and had been introduced to her as Chick Morrison — 
and a group of young men from his stall, who talked about percent- 
age curves of intellectual influence and acted like motorcycle cops. 

Bertram Scudder seemed to be alraid of her. He clung to the 
microphone, spitting words into its delicate mesh, into the ears of 
the country, introducing the subject of his program. He was laboring 
to sound cynical, skeptical, superior and hysterical together, to sound 
like a man who sneers at the vanity of all human beliefs and thereby 
demands an instantaneous belict from his listeners. A small patch of 
moisture glistened on the back of his neck. He was describing in 
overcolored detail her month ol convalescence in the lonely cabin 
of a shecpheider, then her heroic trudging down liity miles of moun- 
tain trails for the sake ol tesummg her duties to the people in this 
grave hour ol national emergency 

”, . . And it any of you have been deceived by vicious rumors 
aimed to undermine your faith in the great social program of our 
leaders — you may trust the woid of Miss Taggart, who--” 

She stood, looking up at the white beam. Specks of dust were 
whirling in the beam and she noticed that one of them was alive: it 
was a gnat with a tiny sparkle in place ol its beating wings, it was 
sliuggling for some frantic purpose of its own, and she watched it, 
tooling as distant from its purpose as front that of the world. 

. . Miss Taggart is an impartial observer, a brilliant business- 
woman who has often been critical of the government in the past 
and who may be said to represent the extreme, conservative view- 
point held by such giants of industry as Hank Rearden. Yet even 
she—” 

She wondered at how easy it felt, when one did not have to feel; 
she seemed to be standing naked on public display, and a beam of 
light was enough to support her, because there was no weight of 
pain in her, no hope, no regret, no concern, no future, 

. . And now, ladies and gentlemen, 1 will piesent to you the 
heroine of this night, our most uncommon guest, the — ” 

Pain came back to her in a sudden, piercing stab, like a long 

779 



splinter from the glass of a protective wall shattered by the knowl- 
edge that the next words would be hers; it came back for the brief 
length of a name in her mind, the name of the man she had called 
the destroyer: she did not want him to hear what she would now 
have to say. If you hear it — the pain was like a voice crying it to 
him — you won’t believe the things I have said to you —no, worse, 
the things which I have not said, but which you knew and believed 
and accepted — you will think that 1 was not free to offer them and 
that my days with you were a lie — this will destroy my one month 
and ten of your years — this was not the way I wanted you to learn 
it, not like this, not tonight — but you will, you who’ve watched and 
known my every movement, you who’re watching me now, wherever 
you are — you will hear it— but it has to he said. 

“ — the last descendant of an illustrious name in our industrial his- 
tory, the woman executive possible only in America, the Operating 
Vice-President of a great railroad — Miss Dagny Taggart!” 

Then she felt the touch of Rearden Metal, as her hand closed over 
the stem of the microphone, and it was suddenly easy, not with the 
drugged ease of indifference, but with the bright, dear, living ease 
of action. 

"I came here to tell you about the social program, the political 
system and the moral philosophy under which you are now living.” 

There was so calm, so natural, so total a certainly in the sound of 
her voice that the mere sound seemed to carry an immense per- 
suasiveness. 

"You have heard it said that I behove that this system has deprav- 
ity as its moli\e, plunder as its goal, lies, lraud and foice as its 
method, and destruction as its only result. You have also heard it 
said that, like Hank Rearden, I am a loyal supporter of this system 
and that I give my voluntary co-operation to present politics, such 
as Directive 10--289. I have come here to tell you the truth about it 

"It is true that I share the stand with Hank Rearden, His political 
convictions are mine. You have heard him denounced in the past as 
a reactionary who opposed every step, measute, slogan and premise 
of the present system. Now you hear him praised as our greatest 
industrialist, whose judgment on the value ol economic policies may 
safely be trusted. It is true. You may tiust his judgment. If you are 
now beginning to fear that you are in the power of an n responsible 
evil, that the country is collapsing and that you will soon be lelt to 
starve — consider the views of our ablest industrialist, who knows 
what conditions are necessary to make production possible and to 
permit a country to survive. Consider all that you know about his 
views. At such times as he was able to speak, you have heard him 
tell you that this government’s policies w$re leading you to enslave 
ment and destruction. Yet he did not denounce the final climax of 
these policies — Directive 10--289. You have heard him fighting lor 
his rights — his and yours— for his independence, for his property. 
Yet he did not fight Directive 10-289. H<$ signed voluntarily, so you 
have been told, the Gift Certificate that surrendered Rearden Metal 
to his enemies. He signed the one paper which, by all of his previous 
record, you had expected him to fight to the death. What could this 

780 



mean — you have constantly been told— unless it meant that even he 
recognized the necessity of Directive 1 0-289 and sacrificed his per- 
sonal interests for the sake of the country? Judge his views by the 
motive of that action, you have constantly been told. And with this 
I agree unreservedly: judge his views by the motive of that action , 
And — for whatever value you attach to my opinion and to any warn- 
ing I may give you— judge my views also by the motive of that action, 
because his convictions are mine. 

“For two years, 1 had been Hank Rearden’s mistress. Let there 
be no misunderstanding about it: 1 am saying this, not as a shameful 
confession, but with the highest sense of pride. 1 had been his mis- 
tress. I had slept with him, in his bed, in his arms. There is nothing 
anyone might now say to you about me, which I will not tell you 
first. It will be useless to defame me — I know the nature of the 
accusations and 1 will state them to you myself. Did I feel a physical 
desire for him? I did. Was 1 moved by a passion of my body? I was. 
Have I experienced the most violent form of sensual pleasure? I 
have. If this now makes me a disgraced woman in >our eyes— let 
your estimate be your own concern. I will stand on mine.” 

Bertram Scudder was staring at her; this was not the speech he 
had expected and he felt, in dun panic, that it was not proper to let 
it continue, but she was the special guest whom the Washington 
rulers had ordered him to treat cautiously; he could not be certain 
whether he was now supposed to interrupt her or not: besides, he 
enjoyed hearing this sort of story. In the audience booth, James 
Taggart and Lillian Rearden sal frozen, like animals paralyzed by 
the headlight of a train rushing down upon them; they were the only 
ones present who knew the connection between the words they were 
hearing and the theme of the broadcast; it was too late for them to 
move; they dared not assume the responsibility of a movement or 
of whatever was to follow. In the control room, a young intellectual 
of Chick Morrison’s staff stood ready to cut the broadcast off the 
air in case of trouble, but he saw no political significance in the 
speech he was hearing, no element he could construe as dangerous 
to his masters He was accustomed to hearing speeches extorted by 
unknown pressure from unwilling victims, and he concluded that this 
was the case of a reactionary forced to confess a scandal and that, 
therefore, the speech had, perhaps, some political value; besides, he 
was curious to hear it 

“I am proud that he had chosen me to give him pleasure and that 
it was he who had been my choice. It was not — as it is for most of 
you — an act of casual indulgence and mutual contempt. It was the 
ultimate form of our admiration for each other, with full knowledge 
of the values by which we made our choice. We are those who do 
not disconnect the values of their minds front the actions of their 
bodies, those who do not leave their values to empty dreams, but 
bring them into existence, those who give material form to thoughts, 
and reality to values — those who make steel, railroads and happiness. 
And to such among you who hate the thought of human joy, who 
wish to see men’s life as chronic suffering and failure, who wish men 
to apologize for happiness — or for success, or ability, or achievement, 

781 



or wealth — to such among you, 1 am now saying: l wanted him, I 
had him, i was happy, 1 had known joy, a pure, full, guiltless joy, 
the joy you dread to hear confessed by any human being, the joy of 
which your only knowledge is in your hatred lor those who are 
worthy of reaching it. Well, hale me, then — because 1 reached it!” 

“Miss Taggart,” said Beitram Scudder nervously, “aren’t we de- 
parting from the subject of . . . After all, your personal relationship 
with Mr. Reardon has no political significance which — ” 

“1 didn’t think it had, either. And, of course, 1 came here to tell 
you about the political and moral system under which you are now 
living Well, 1 thought that I knew everything about Hank Rearden, 
but there was one thing which 1 did not learn until today It was the 
blackmail threat that our relationship would be made public that 
forced Hank Rearden to sign the Gilt Certificate surrendering Rear- 
den Metal. It was blackmail — blackmail by your government officials, 
by your rulers, by your — ” 

In the instant when Scudder’s hand swept out to knock the micro- 
phone over, a faint click came from its throat as it clashed to the 
floor, signifying that the intellectual cop had cut the broadcast off 
the air. 

She laughed — but there was no one to see her and to hear the 
nature of her laughter. The figures rushing into the glass enclosure 
were screaming at one anothei. Chick Morrison was yelling unprint- 
able curses at Bertram Scudder — Bertram Scudder was shouting that 
he had been opposed to the whole idea, bill had been ordered to 
do it — James Taggart looked like an animal baring its teeth, while 
he snarled at two of Morrison’s youngest assistants and avoided the 
snarls of an older third. The muscles of Lillian Rearden \s face had 
an odd slackness, like the limbs of an animal lying in the road, mtacl 
but dead. The morale conditioners were shrieking what they guessed 
they thought Mr. Mouch would think. “What am l to say to them?” 
the program announcer was crying, pointing at the microphone. “Mr. 
Morrison, there’s an audience waiting, what am I to say?” Nobody 
answered him. They were not lighting over what to do, but over 
whom to blame. 

Nobody said a word to Dagny or glanced in her direction. Nobody 
stopped her, when she walked out. 

She stepped into the first taxicab in sight, giving the address of 
her apartment. As the cab started, she noticed that the dial of the 
radio on the driver’s panel was lighted and silent, crackling with the 
brief, tense coughs of static: it was tuned to Bertram Scudder's 
program. 

She lay back against the seat, feeling nothing but the desolation 
of the knowledge that the sweep of he* action had, perhaps, swept 
away the man who might never wish t<| see her again. She felt, for 
the first time, the immensity of the hopelessness of finding him — il 
he did not choose to be found — in thp streets of the city, in the 
towns of a continent, in the canyons of ihe Rocky Mountains where 
the goal was closed by a screen of rays. But one thing remained to 
her, like a log floating on a void, the log to which she had clung 
through the broadcast — and she knew that this was the thing she 

782 



could not abandon, even were she to lose all the rest; it was the 
sound of his voice saying to her: “Nobody stays here by faking reality 
in any manner whatever.'* 

“Ladies and gentlemen." the voice of Bertram Scudder’s an- 
nouncer crackled suddenly out of the static, “due to technical diffi- 
culties over which we have no control, this station will remain off 
the air, pending the necessary readjustments." The taxi driver gave 
a brief, contemptuous chuckle — and snapped the radio off. 

When she stepped out and handed him a bill, he extended the 
change to her and, suddenly, leaned forward for a closer look at her 
face. She felt certain that he recognized her and she held his glance 
austerely for an instant. His bitter face and his overpatched shirt 
were worn out by a hopeless, losing struggle. As she handed him a 
tip, ho said quietly, with too earnest, too solemn an emphasis lor a 
mere acknowledgment of the coins, “ Thunk vow, ma’am." 

She turned swiftly and hurried into the building, not to let him 
see the emotion which was suddenly more than she could bear. 

Her head was drooping, as she unlocked the door ol her apart- 
ment. and the light struck her from below, from the carpet, belore 
she jerked her head up in astonishment at finding the apartment 
lighted. She look a step forward --and saw Hank Rearden standing 
across the room. 

She was held still by two shocks' one was the sight of his presence, 
she had not expected him to be back so soon: the other was the 
sight of his lace His face had so firm, so confident, so mature a look 
of calm, m the taint half -smile, in the clarity of the eyes, that she 
felt as it he had aged decades within one month, but aged in the 
proper sense of human growth, aged in vision, in stature, in powder. 
She felt that he who had lived through a month of agony, he whom 
she had hurt so deeply and was about to hurt more deeply still, he 
would now be the one to give her suppoit and consolation, ins would 
he the strength to protect them both. She stood motionless for only 
an instant, but she saw his smile deepening as if he were reading 
her thoughts and telling her that she had nothing to fear. SJje heard 
a slight, crackling sound and saw. on a table beside him, the lighted 
dial of a silent radio Her eves moved to his as a question and he 
answered by the faintest nod, barely more than a lowering of his 
eyelids; he had heard her broadcast. 

They moved toward each other in the same moment He seized 
her shoulders to support her, her face was raised to his. but he did 
not touch her lips, he took her hand and kissed her wrist, her fingers, 
her palm, as the sole form of the greeting which so much of his 
suffering had gone to await. And suddenly, broken by the whole of 
this day and of that month, she was sobbing in his arms, slumped 
against him, sobbing as she had never done in her life, as a woman, 
in surrender to pain and in a last, futile protest against it. 

Holding her so that she stood and moved only by means of his 
body, not hers, he led her to the couch and tried to make her stt 
down beside him, but she slipped to the fhxir. to sit at his feet and 
bury her face in his knees and sob without defense or disguise. 

He did not lift her, he let her cry, with his arm tight about her. 

783 



She felt his hand on her head, on her shoulder, she felt the protection 
of his firmness, a firmness which seemed to tell her that as her tears 
were for both of them, so was his knowledge, that he knew her pain 
and felt it and understood, yet was able to witness it calmly — and 
his calm seemed to lift her burden, by granting her the right to break, 
here, at his feet, by telling her that he was able to carry what she 
could not carry any longer. She knew dimly that this was the real 
Hank Rearden, and no matter what form of insulting cruelty he had 
once given to their first nights together, no matter how often she 
had seemed as the stronger of the two, this had always been within 
him and at the root of their bond — this strength of his which would 
protect her if ever hers were gone. 

When she raised her head, he was smiling down at her. 

•‘Hank . . she whispered guiltily, in desperate astonishment at 
her own break. 

“Quiet, darling.” 

She let her face drop back on his knees; she lay still, lighting for 
rest, fighting against the pressure of a wordless thought; he had been 
able to bear and to accept her broadcast only as a confession of her 
love; it made the truth she now had to tell him more inhuman a 
blow than anyone had the right to deliver. She felt terror at the 
thought that she would not have the strength to do it, and terror at 
the thought that she would. 

When she looked up at him again, he ran his hand over her tore- 
head, brushing the hair off her face. 

“It’s over, darling,” he said. “The worst of it is over, for both 
of us.” 

“No, Hank, it isn’t.” 

fie smiled. 

He drew her to sit beside him. with her head on his shoulder. 
“Don’t say anything now,” he said. “You know that we both under- 
stand all that has to be said, and we’ll speak of it, but not until it 
has ceased to hurt you quite so much.” 

His hand moved down the line of her sleeve, down a fold of her 
skirt, witn so light a pressure that it seemed as it the hand did not 
feel the body inside the clothes, as if he were regaining possession, 
not of her body, but only of its vision. 

“You've taken too much,” he said. “So have I. Let them batter 
us. There’s no reason why we should add to it. No matter what we 
have to face, there can be no suffering between the two of us. No 
added pain. Let that come from their world. It won't come from us. 
Don’t be afraid. We won t hurt each other. Not now.” 

vShe raised her head, shaking it with $ bitter smile— there was a 
desperate violence in her movement, b^t the smile was a sign of 
recovery, of the determination to face tl|e despair. 

“Hank, the kind of hell I let you go through in the last month — ” 
Her voice was trembling. . 

“It’s nothing, compared to the kind of hell I let you go through 
in the last hour.” His voice was steady. 

She got up, to pace the room, to prqve her strength — her steps 
like words telling him that she was not to be spared any longer. 

784 



When she stopped and turned to face him, he rose, as if he under- 
stood her motive. 

“I know that I’ve made it worse for you,” she said, pointing at 
the radio. 

He shook his head. “No.” 

“Hank, there v s something I have to tell you.” 

“So have I. Will you let me speak first? You sec, it’s something i 
should have said to you long ago. Will you let me speak and not 
answer me until I finish?” 

She nodded. 

He took a moment to look at her as she stood before him, as if 
to hold the full sight of her figure, of this moment and of everything 
that had led them to it. 

“I love you, Dagny,” he said quietly, with the simplicity of an 
unclouded, yet unsmiling happiness. 

She was about to speak, but knew that she couldn’t, even if he 
had permitted it, she caught her unuttered words, the movement of 
her lips was her only answer, then she inclined her head in 
acceptance. 

“I love you. As the same value, as the same expression, with the 
same pride and the same meaning as 1 love my work, my mills, my 
Metal, my hours at a desk, at a furnace, in a laboratory', in an ore 
mine, as I love my ability to work, as I love the act of sight and 
knowledge, as I love the action ot my mind when it solves a chemical 
equation or grasps a sunrise, as 1 love the things I've made and the 
filings I’ve felt, as mv product, as my choice, as a shape ot my world, 
as my best mirror, as the wife I’ve never had, as that which makes 
all the rest ot it possible- as my power to live.” 

She did not drop her face, but kept it level and open, to hear and 
accept, as he wanted her to and as he deserved. 

“I loved you from the first day 1 saw you, on a flatcar on a siding 
of Milford Station. 1 loved you when we rode in the cab of the first 
engine on the John Galt Line. I loved you on the gallery of Ellis 
Wyatt’s house 1 loved you on that next morning. You knew' it. Hut 
it’s 1 who must say it to you, as I’m saying it now- -it 1 am to redeem 
all those days anil to let them be tullv what they were for both of 
us, I loved you. You knew it. 1 didn’t. And because l didn’t, 1 had 
lt> learn it when I sat at my desk and looked at the Cult Certificate 
loi Reardon Metal.” 

She closed her eyes. But there was no sutfering in his face, nothing 
but the immense and quiet happiness of clarity. 

“ ‘We are those who do not disconnect the values of their minds 
Irom the actions of their bodies.’ You said it in your broadcast to- 
night. But you knew it. then, on that morning m Eltis Wyatt’s house. 
You knew that all those insults I was throwing at you were the fullest 
confession of love a man could make. You knew that the physical 
desire I was damning as our mutual shame, is neither physical nor 
m expression of one’s body, but the expression of one’s mind’s deep- 
est values, whether one has the courage to know it or not. That was 
why you laughed at me as you did, wasn’t it?” 

“Yes.” she whispered. 


785 



“You said, *1 do not want your mind, your will, vour being or 
your soul — so long as it’s to me that you will come tor that lowest 
one of your desires. 5 You knew, when you said it, that it was my 
mind, my will, my being and my soul that I was giving you by means 
of that desire. And l want to say it now, to let that morning mean 
what it meant: my mind, my will, my being and my soul, Dagny — 
yours, for as long as 1 shall live.” 

He was looking straight at her and she saw a brief sparkle in his 
eyes, which was not a smile, but almost as if he had heard the cry 
she had not uttered. 

“Let me finish, dearest. I want you to know how fully I know 
what l am saying. I, who thought that I was fighting them, 1 had 
accepted the worst of our enemies' creed — and that is what I’ve paid 
for ever since, as l am paying now and as I must. I had accepted 
the one tenet by which they destroy a man before he's started, the 
killer-tenet: the breach between his mind and body. I had accepted 
it, like most of their victims, not knowing it, not knowing even that 
the issue existed. I rebelled against their creed of human impotence 
and 1 took pride in my ability to think, to act, to work for the 
satisfaction ot my desires. But I did not know that this was virtue, 
I never identified it as a moral value, as the highest of moral values, 
to be defended above one’s life, because it’s that which makes life 
possible. And I accepted punishment for it, punishment for virtue at 
the hands oi an arrogant evil, made arrogant solely by my ignorance 
and my submission. 

“I accepted their insults, their frauds, their extortions. I thought I 
could afford to ignore them — all those impotent mystics who prattle 
about their souls and are unable to build a roof over their heads I 
thought that the world was mine, and those jabbering incompetents 
were no threat to my strength. I could not understand why 1 kept 
losing every battle. I did not know that the force unleashed against 
me was my own. While I was busy conquering matter, 1 had surrend- 
ered to them the realm of the mind, of thought, of principle, of law, 
of values, of morality. 1 had accepted, unwittingly and by default, 
the tenet that ideas were of no consequence to one’s existence, to 
one’s work, to reality, to this earth — as if ideas were not the province 
of reason, but of that mystic faith which 1 despised. This was all they 
wanted me to concede. It was enough. I had surrendered that which 
all of their claptrap is designed to subvert and to destroy: man’s 
reason. No, they were not able to deal with matter, to produce abun- 
dance, to control this earth. They did not have to. They controlled 
me. 

“I, who knew that wealth is only a means to an end, created the 
means and let them prescribe my ends I. who took pride in my 
ability to achieve the satisfaction of my desires, let them prescribe 
the code of values by which I judged my desires. I. who shaped 
matter to serve my purpose, was left \^ith a pile of steel and gold, 
but with my every purpose defeated, njy every desire betrayed, my 
every attempt at happiness frustrated. 

“I had cut myself in two, as the mystics preached, and 1 ran my 
business by one code of rules, but my own life by another, i rebelled 

786 



against the looter’s attempt to set the price and value of my steel— 
but I let them set the moral values of my life, I rebelled against 
demands for an unearned wealth — but I thought it was my duty to 
grant an unearned love to a wife 1 despised, an unearned respect to 
a mother who hated me, an unearned support to a brother who 
plotted for my destruction. 1 rebelled against undeserved financial 
injury — but l accepted a life of undeserved pain. 1 rebelled against 
the doctrine that my productive ability was guilt — but I accepted, as 
guilt, my capacity for happiness. I rebelled against the creed that 
virtue is some disembodied unknowable of the spirit — but I damned 
you, you, my dearest one, for the desire of your body and mine. But 
if the body is evil, then so are those who provide the means of its 
survival, so is material wealth and those who produce it — and if 
moral values arc set in contradiction to our physical existence, then 
it’s right that rewards should be unearned, that virtue should consist 
of the undone, that there should be no tie between achievement and 
profit, that the inferior animals who' re able to produce should serve 
those superior beings whose superiority in spirit consists of incompe- 
tence in the flesh. 

*‘lf some man like Hugh Akston had told me, when 1 started, that 
by accepting the mystics’ theory of sex 1 was accepting the looters’ 
theory of economics, 1 would have laughed in his face. I would not 
laugh at him now. Now I see Reardon Steel being ruled by human 
scum — 1 see the achievement ot my life serving to enrich the worst 
of my enemies- -and as to the only two persons l ever loved, I’ve 
brought a deadly insult to one and public disgrace to the other. 1 
slapped the lace of the man who was my tnend, my defender, my 
teacher, the man who set me free by helping me to learn what I’ve 
learned. I loved him, Dagny, he was the brother, the son. the com- 
rade i never had — but l knocked him out of my life, because he 
would not help me to produce for the looters. I'd give anything now 
to have him back, but 1 own nothing to offer in such repayment, 
and HI never see him again, because it's I who’ll know that there is 
no way to deserve even the right to ask forgiveness 

“But what I've done to you, my dearest, is still worse. Your speech 
and that you had to make it — -that's what I've brought upon the only 
woman I loved, in payment for the only happiness I’ve known. Don't 
tell me that it was your choice from the first and that you accepted 
all consequences, including tonight— it does not redeem the fact that 
it was l who had no better choice to offer you. And that the looters 
lorced you to speak, that you spoke to avenge me and set me free — 
does not redeem the fact that it was I who made their tactics possi- 
ble. It was not their own convictions of sin and dishonor that they 
could use to disgrace you — it was mine. They merely carried out the 
things 1 believed and said in Ellis Wyatt’s house, it was I who kept 
our love hidden as a guilty secret — they merely treated it for what 
it was by my own appraisal. It was 1 who was willing to counterfeit 
reality for the sake of appearance in their eves — they merely cashed 
in on the right I had given them. 

"People think that a liar gains a victory over his victim. What I've 
learned is that a lie is an act of self-abdication, because one surren- 

787 



dcrs one’s reality to the person to whom one lies, making that person 
one’s master, condemning oneself from then on to faking the sort of 
reality that person’s view requires to be faked. And if one gains the 
immediate purpose of the lie — the price one pays is the destruction 
of that which the gain was intended to serve. The man who lies to 
the world, is the world’s slave from then on. When I chose to hide 
my love for you, to disavow it in public and live it as a lie, I made 
it public property — and the public has claimed it in a fitting sort of 
manner. I had no way to avert it and no power to save you. When 
I gave in to the looters, when l signed their Gift Certificate, to 
protect you — I was still faking reality, there was nothing else left 
open to me — and, Dagny, I’d rather have seen us both dead than to 
permit them to do what they threatened. But there are no white lies, 
there is only the blackest of destruction, and a white lie is the black- 
est ot all. I was still faking reality, and it had the inexorable result: 
instead of protection, it brought you a more terrible kind of ordeal, 
instead of saving your name, it forced you to offer yourself for a 
public stoning and to throw the stones by your own hand. I know 
that you were proud of the things you said, and 1 was proud to hear 
you— but that was the pride we should have claimed two years ago. 

“No. you did not make it worse for me, you set me free, you 
saved us both, you redeemed our past. I can’t ask you to lorgive 
me, we’re far beyond such terms — and the only atonement I can 
offer you is the fact that I am happy. That 1 am happy, my darling. 
not that I suffer. I am happy that 1 have seen the truth- even if my 
power of sight is all that's left to me now. W ere 1 to surrender to 
pain and give up in lutile regret that my own error has wrecked my 
past — that would be the act of final treason, the ultimate failure 
toward that truth 1 regret having failed. But if my love of truth is 
left as my only possession, then the greater the loss behind me, the 
greater the pride l may take in the price I have paid lor that love 
Then the wreckage will not become a lunereal mount above me, but 
will serve as a height 1 have climbed to attain a wider field of vision. 
My pride and my power of vision were all that 1 owned when I 
started— and whatever I achieved, was achieved by means ol them. 
Both are greater now. Now I have the knowledge ol the superlative 
value 1 had missed: of my right to be proud of my vision, lhe rest 
is mine to reach. 

‘ And, Dagny, the one thing I wanted, as the first step oi my 
future, was to say that I love you — as I’m saying it now I love you, 
my dearest, with that blindest passion of mv body which comes from 
the clearest perception of my mind — and my love for you is the only 
attainment of my past that will be left to me, unchanged, through 
all the years ahead. 1 wanted to say it to you while I still had the 
right to say it. And because I had not $aid it at our beginning, this 
is the way I have to say it — at the end. Now I'll tell you what it was 
that you wanted to tell me— because, yop see. I know it and I accept: 
somewhere within the past month, you Jiave met the man you h\ve. 
and if love means one’s final, irreplaceable choice, then he is the 
only man you’ve ever loved.” 

“Yes!” Her voice was half-gasp, half-scream, as under a physical 

788 



blow, the shock as her only awareness. “Hank! — how did you 
know it?” 

He smiled and pointed at the radio. “My darling, you used nothing 
but the past tense.” 

“Oh . . . !” Her voice was now half-gasp, half-moan, and she 
closed her eyes. 

“You nevci pronounced the one word you would have rightfully 
thrown at them, were it otherwise You said. "1 wanted him, 1 not, *1 
love him. 1 You told me on the phone today that you could have 
returned sooner. No other reason would have made you leave me 
as you did. Only that one reason was valid and right.” 

She was leaning back a little, as if fighting for balance to stand, 
vet she was looking straight at him, with a smile that did not part 
her lips, but softened her eyes to a glance of admiration and her 
mouth to a shape of pain. 

“It’s true. I've met the man 1 love and will always love. I’ve seen 
him, I've spoken to him — but he’s a man whom 1 can't have, whom 
1 may never have and, perhaps, may never see again.” 

*1 think I’ve always known that you would find him. I knew what 
you felt for me, I knew how much it was, but I knew that 1 was not 
your final choice. What you'll give him is not taken away from me, 
it's what I’ve never had I can't rebel against it. What I've had means 
too much to me -and that I’ve had it, can never be changed.'* 

"Do you warn me to say it, flank*’ Will you understand it, if 1 say 
that I'll always love you ’” 

“1 think I've understood it before you did.” 

Tve always seen you as you are now. 'Hiat greatness of yours 
which you are just beginning to allow yourself to know- -I've always 
known it and I've watched your struggle to discover it. Don’t speak 
of atonement, you have not hurt me, your mistakes came from your 
magnificent integrity under the torture of an impossible code — and 
your light against it did not bring me suffering, it brought me the 
feeling I've found too seldom: admiration. If you will accept it, it 
will always be yours. What you meant to me can never be changed. 
But the man l met - -he is the love I had wanted to reach long before 
I knew that he existed, and I think he will remain beyond my reach, 
but that 1 love him will be enough to keep me living.” 

He look her hand and pressed it to his lips “Then you know what 
I teel,” he said, “and why l am still happy.” 

Looking up at his face, she realized that for the first time he was 
what she had always thought him intended to be: a man with an 
immense capacity for the enjoyment of existence. The taut look of 
endurance, of fiercely unadmitted pain, was gone; now, in the midst 
of the wreckage and of his hardest hour, his face had the serenity 
of pure strength; it had the look she had seen in the faces of the 
men in the valley. 

“Hank,” she whispered, “I don’t think I can explain it, but 1 feel 
that I have committed no treason, either to you or to him.” 

“You haven't.” 

Her eyes seemed abnormally alive in a face drained of color, as 
if her consciousness remained untouched in a body broken by ex- 

789 



hauslion. He made her sit down and slipped his arm 'along the back, 
of the couch, not touching her. yet holding her in a protective 
embrace. 

"Now tell me," he a,sked, "‘where were you?" 

"1 can't tell you that. I've given my word never to reveal anything 
about it. I can say only that it’s a place J found by accident, when 
1 crashed, and I left it blindfolded— and 1 wouldn't be able to find 
it again.” 

"Couldn't you trace your way back to it?” 

"1 won't try.” 

“And the man”” 

“I won’t look for him." 

"He remained there?” 

i don't know.” 

“Why did you leave him?” 

”1 can’t tell you,” 

“Who is he?” 

Her chuckle of desperate amusement was involuntary. "Who is 
John Galt?” 

He glanced at her, astonished — but realized that she was not jok- 
ing. "So there is a John Gall?” he asked slowly. 

"Yes.” 

“That slant: phrase refers to hitnT 

"Yes ” 

"And it has some special meaning? ' 

"Oh yes! . . . There's one thing I can tell you about him, because 
1 discovered it earlier, without promise of secrecy, he is the man 
who invented the motor we found.” 

“Oh!” He smiled, as if he should have known it Then he said 
softly, with a glance that was almost compassion, "lie's the de- 
stroyer, isn't he ?” He saw her look of shock, and added. "No. don't 
answer me, if you can't. 1 think 1 know where you were. It was 
Quentin Daniels that you wanted to save from the destroyer, and 
you were following Daniels when you crashed, weren't you 9 ” 

"Yes.” 

"Good God, Dagny!— does such a place really exist? Are they all 
alive? Is there . . . ? I’m sorry. Don't answer.” 

She smiled, it does exist.” 

He remained silent for a long time. 

“Hank, could you give up Rearden Steel?” 

“No!” The answer was fiercely immediate, but he added, with the 
first sound of hopclessnes.s in his voice, "Not yet.” 

Then he looked at her, as if, in the transition of his three words, 
he had lived the course of her agony of the past month. "I see,” he 
said. He ran his hand over her forehead, with a gesture of under- 
standing, of compassion, of an almost incredulous wonder. “What 
hell you’ve now undertaken to endure!” he said, his voice low. 

She nodded. 

She slipped down, to lie stretched, her face on his knees. He 
stroked her hair; he said, “We’ll fight the looters as long as we can. 
I don’t know what future is possible to us, but we'll win or we’ll 

790 



learn that it’s hopeless. Until we do, we’ll fight for our world. We’re 
all that’s left of it.” 

She fell asleep, lying there, her hand clasping his. Her last aware- 
ness, before she surrendered the icsponsibility of consciousness, was 
the sense of an enormous void, the void of a city and of a continent 
where she would never be able to find the man whom she had no 
right to seek. 


Chapter IV ANTI-LIFE 

lames Taggart reached into the pocket of his dinner jacket, pulled 
out the first wad ot paper he found, which was a hundred-dollar bill, 
and dropped it into the beggar’s hand. 

He noticed that the beggar pocketed the money m a manner as 
indifferent as his own. “Thanks, bud.” said the beggar contemptu- 
ously, and walked away 

James Taggart remained still in the middle ot the sidewalk, won- 
dering what gave him a sense of shock and dread. It was not the 
man’s insolence — he had not sought any gratitude, he had not been 
moved by pity, his gesture had been automatic and meaningless. It 
was that the beggar acted as if he would have been indifferent had 
he leceived a hundred dollars or a dime or, failing to find any help 
whatever, he had seen himself dying of starvation within this night. 
laggaTt shuddered and walked brusquely on, the shudder serving to 
cut off the realization that the beggar's mood matched his own. 

The walls of the street aiound him had the stressed, unnatural 
clarity of a summer twilight, while an orange haze filled the channels 
of intersections and veiled the tiers ot roofs, leaving him on a shrink- 
ing remnant of ground. The calendar in the sky seemed to stand 
insistently out ot the haze, yellow like a page of old parchment, 
saying: August 5. 

No— he thought, in answers to things he had not named — it was 
not true, he felt line, that's why he wanted to do something tonight. 
He could not admit to himself that his peculiar restlessness came 
from a desire to experience pleasure; he could not admit that the 
particulai pleasure he wanted was that ot celebration, because he 
could not admit what it was that he wanted to celebrate. 

This had been a day of intense activity, spent on words floating 
as vaguely as cotton* yet achieving a purpose as precisely as an add- 
ing machine, summing up to his full satisfaction. But his purpose and 
the nature of his satisfaction had to be kept as carefully hidden from 
himself as they had been from others; and his sudden craving for 
pleasure was a dangerous breach. 

The day had started with a small luncheon in the hotel suite of a 
visiting Argentinian legislator, where a few people of various nation- 
alities had talked at leisurely length about the climate of Argentina, 
its soil, its resources, the needs of its people, the value of a dynamic, 
progressive attitude toward the future — and had mentioned, as the 
briefest topic of conversation, that Argentina would be declared a 
People’s State within two weeks. 

791 



It had been followed by a few cocktails at the home of Orren 
Boyle, with only one unobtrusive gentleman from Argentina sitting 
silently in a corner, while two executives from Washington and a few 
friends of unspecified positions had talked about national resources, 
metallurgy, mineralogy, neighborly duties and the welfare of the 
globe — and had mentioned that a loan of four billion dollars would 
be granted within three weeks to the People’s State of Argentina 
and the People’s State of Chile. 

It had been followed by a small cocktail party in a private room 
of the bar built like a cellar on the roof of a skyscraper, an informal 
party given by him, James Taggart, for the directors of a recently 
formed company. The Interneighborly Amity and Development Cor- 
poration. of which Orren Boyle was president and a slender, graceful, 
overactive man from Chile was treasurer, a man whose name was 
Sefior Mario Martinez, but whom Taggart was templed, by some 
resemblance of spirit, to call Seftor Cuffy Meigs. Here they had 
talked about golf, horse races, boat races, automobiles and women. 
It had not been necessary to mention, since they all knew it, that 
the Interneighborly Amity and Development Corporation had an 
exclusive contract to operate, on a twenty-year “managerial lease,” 
all the industrial properties of the People's States of the Southern 
Hemisphere. 

The last event of the day had been a large dinner reception at the 
home of Seftor Rodrigo Gonzales, a diplomatic representative of 
Chile. No one had heard of Sefior Gon/ales a year ago. but he had 
become famous for the parties he had given in the past six months, 
ever since his arrival m New York. His guests described him as a 
progressive businessman. He had lost his property— it was said — 
when Chile, becoming a People's State, had nationalized all proper- 
ties, except those belonging to citizens of backward, non-Peoplo’s 
countries, such as Argentina; but he had adopted an enlightening 
attitude and had joined the new regime, placing himself in the service 
of his country. His home in New York occupied an entire lloor of 
an exclusive residential hotel He had a fat, blank face and the eyes 
of a killer. Watching him at tonight's reception, Taggart had con- 
cluded that the man was impervious to any sorf of feeling, he looked 
as if a knife could slash, unnoticed, through his pendulous layers of 
flesh— except that there was a lewd, almost sexual relish in the wav 
he rubbed his feet against the rich pile of his Persian rugs, or patted 
the polished arm of his chair, or folded his lips about a cigar. His 
wife, the Sefiora Gonzales, was a small, attractive woman, not as 
beautiful as she assumed, but enjoying the reputation of a beauty by 
means of a violent nervous energy and an odd manner of loose, 
warm, cynical self-assertiveness that see&ied to promise anything and 
to absolve anyone. It was known that h^r particular brand of trading 
was her husband’s chief asset, in an age^when one traded, not goods, 
but favors— and, watching her among t%c guests, Taggart had found 
amusement in wondering what deals ha4 been made, what directives 
issued, what industries destroyed in exchange for a few chance nights, 
which most of those men had had no reason to seek and, perhaps, 
could no longer remember. The party had bored him, there had been 

792 



only half a dozen persons for whose sake he had put in an appear- 
ance, and it had not been necessary to speak to that half-dozen, 
merely to be seen and to exchange a few glances. Dinner had been 
about to be served; when he had heard what he had come to hear: 
Seflor Gonzales had mentioned — the smoke of his cigar weaving over 
the half-dozen men who had drifted toward his armchair- -that by 
agreement with the future People’s State of Argentina, the properties 
of d’Anconia Copper would be nationalized by the People’s State of 
Chile, in less than a month, on September 2. 

It had all gone as Taggart had expected; the unexpected had come 
when, on hearing those words, he had felt an irresistible urge to 
escape. He had felt incapable of enduring the boredom ot the dinner, 
as if some other form of activity were needed to greet the achieve- 
ment of this night. He had walked out into the summer twilight of 
the streets, feeling as if he were both pursuing and pursued: pursuing 
a pleasure which nothing could give him, in celebration ot a feeling 
which he dared not name —pursued by the dread of discovering what 
motive had moved him through the planning of tonight’s achieve- 
ment and what aspect of it now gave him this feverish sense of 
gratification. 

He reminded himself that he would sell his d’Anconia Copper 
stock, which had never rallied fully after its crash ot last year, and 
he would purchase shares of the Inlerneighboily Amity and Develop- 
ment Corporation, as agreed with his friends, which would bring him 
a fortune. But the thought brought him nothing but boredom; this 
was not the thing he wanted to celebrate. 

He tried to force himself to enjoy it: money, he thought, had been 
his motive, money, nothing worse. Wasn’t that a normal motive? A 
valid one? Wasn’t that what they all were after, the Wyatts, the 
Reardens, the d’Anconias? . . , He jerked his head to stop it; he felt 
as if his thoughts were slipping down a dangerous blind alley, the 
end of which he must never permit himself to see. 

No — he thought bleakly, in reluctant admission — money meant 
nothing to him any longer. He had thrown dollars about by the 
hundreds — at that parly he had given today — for unfinished drinks, 
for uneaten delicacies, for unprovoked tips and unexpected whims, 
tor a long-distance phone call to Argentina because one of the guests 
had wanted to check the exact version of a smutty story he had 
started telling, for the spur of any moment, for the clammy stupor 
of knowing that it was easier to pay than to think. 

“You've got nothing to worry about, under that Railroad Unifica- 
tion Plan,” Orren Boyle had giggled to him drunkenlv. Under the 
Railroad Unification Plan, a local railroad had gone bankrupt in 
North Dakota, abandoning the region to the fate of a blighted area, 
the local banker had committed suicide, first killing his wife and 
children—a freight train had been taken off the schedule in Tennes- 
see, leaving a local tactory without transportation at a day’s notice, 
the factory owner’s son had quit college and was now m jail, awaiting 
execution for a murder committed with a gang of ratders—a way 
station had been closed in Kansas, and the station agent, who had 
wanted to be a scientist, had given up his studies and become a 

793 



dishwasher— that he, James Taggart, might sit in a private barroom 
and pay for the alcohol pouring down Orren Boyle’s throat, for the 
waiter who sponged Boyle’s garments when he spilled his drink over 
his chest, for the carpet burned by the cigarettes of an ex-pimp from 
Chile who did not want to take the trouble of reaching for an ashtray 
across a distance of three feet. 

It was not the knowledge ol his indifference to money that now 
gave him a shudder of dread. It was the knowledge that he would 
be equally indifferent, were he reduced to the state of the beggar. 
There had been a time when he had felt some measure of guilt — in 
no clearer a form than a touch of irritation — at the thought that he 
shared the sin of greed, which he spent his time denouncing. Now 
he was hit by the chill realization that, in fact, he had never been a 
hypocrite- m full truth, he had never cared for money Hus left 
another hole gaping open before him, leading into another blind 
alley which he could not risk seeing. 

I just want to do something tonight! — he cried soundlessly to 
someone at large, in protest and in demanding anger— in protest 
against whatever it was that kept lorcmg these thoughts into his 
mind — in anger at a universe where some malevolent power would 
not permit him to find enjoyment without the need to know what 
he wanted or why. 

What do you want? --some enemy voice kept asking, and he 
walked faster, trying to escape it. It seemed to him that his brain 
was a maze where a blind alley opened at every turn, leading into 
a fog that hid an abyss. It seemed to him that he was running, while 
the small island of safety was shrinking and nothing but those alleys 
would soon be left It was like the remnant of clarity in the stieet 
around him, with the haze rolling in to fill all exits. Why did it have 
to shrink? — he thought in panic. This was the way he had lived all his 
life— keeping his eyes stubbornly, safely on the immediate pavement 
before him, craftily avoiding the sight ol his road, of corners, of 
distances, of pinnacles. He had never intended going anywhere, he 
had wanted to be free of progression, free of the yoke of a straight 
line, he had never wanted his years to add up to any sum — what 
had summed them up? — why had he reached some unchosen destina- 
tion where one could no longer stand still or retreat? ‘‘Look where 
you’re going, brother!” snarled some voice, while an elbow pushed 
him back — and he realized that he had collided with some large, ill- 
smelling figure and that he had been running. 

He slowed his steps and admitted into his mind a recognition of 
the streets he had chosen in his random escape. He had not wanted 
to know that he was going home to hi^ wife. That, too, was a fog- 
bound alley, but there was no other left to him. 

He knew — the moment he saw Cherryl’s silent, poised figure as 
she rose at his entrance into her room — Jhat this was more dangerous 
than he had allowed himself to know and that he would not find 
what he wanted. But danger, to him, was a signal to shut off his 
sight, suspend his judgment and pursue an unaltered course, on the 
unstated premise that the danger would remain unreal by the sover- 

794 



eign power of his wish not to see it — like a foghorn within him, 
blowing, not to sound a warning, but to summon the fog. 

"Why. yes, I did have an important business banquet to attend, 
but I changed my mind, I felt like having dinner with you tonight,” 
he said in the tone of a compliment — but a quiet "f see” was the 
only answer he obtained. 

He felt irritation at her unastonished manner and her pale, unre- 
vealing face. He felt irritation at the smooth efficiency with which 
she gave instructions to the servants, then at finding himself in the 
candlelight of the dining room, facing hei across a perfectly ap- 
pointed table, with two crystal cups of fruit in silver bowls of ice 
between them. 

It was her poise that irritated him most; she was no longer an 
incongruous little freak, dwarfed by the luxury of the residence which 
a famous uitisl had designed, she matched it. She sat at the table as 
if she were the kind of hostess that room had the right to demand. 
She wore a tailored housecoat of russet -colored brocade that blended 
with the bronze of hei hair, the severe simplicity of its lines serving 
as her only ornament. He would have preferred the jingling bracelets 
and rhinestone buckles of her past. Her eyes disturbed him, as they 
had for months, they were neither friendly nor hostile, but watchful 
and questioning 

“I closed a big deal today.'* he said, his tone part boastful, part 
pleading. “A deal involving this whole continent and half a dozen 
governments." 

He realized that the awe, the admiration, the eager curiosity he 
had expected, belonged to the face of the little shopgirl who had 
ceased to exist. He saw none of it in the face of his wife; even anger 
or hatred would have been preferable to her level, attentive glance; 
the glance was worse than accusing, it was inquiring 

"What deal, Jim?" 

"What do you mean, what deal? Why are you suspicious? Why 
do you have to start prying at once?" 

"I’m sorry. I didn't know it was confidential You don't have to 
answer me." 

"It's not confidential." He waited, but she remained silent. "Well? 
Aren’t vou going to say anything?" 

“Why, no." She said it simply, as if to please him. 

“So you’re not interested at all?" 

"But I thought you didn’t want to discuss it." 

“Oh, don’t be so tricky!" he snapped. "It's a big business deal. 
That’s what you admire, isn’t it, big business? Well, it's bigger than 
anything those boys ever dreamed of. They spend their lives grub- 
bing for theii fortunes penny by penny, while I can do it like that"' — 
he snapped his fingers — “just like that. It’s the biggest single stunt 
ever pulled." 

"Stunt, Jim?" 

“Deal!" 

“And you did it? Yourself?" 

“You bet I did! That fat fool, Orren Boyle, couldn't have swung 
it m a million years. This took knowledge and skill and timing" — he 

795 



saw a spark of interest in her eyes — “and psychology.” The spark 
vanished, but he went rushing heedlessly on. “One had to know how 
to approach Wesley, and how to keep the wrong influences away 
from him, and how to get Mr. Thompson interested without letting 
him know too much, and how to cut Chick Morrison in on it, but 
keep Tinky Holloway out, and how to get the right people to give 
a few parties for Wesley at the right time, and . . . Say, Cherry!, is 
there any champagne in this house?" 

“Champagne?" 

“Can’t we do something special tonight? Can’t we have a sort of 
celebration together?" 

“We can have champagne, yes, Jim, of course.” 

She rang the bell and gave the orders, in her odd, lifeless, uncritical 
manner, a manner of meticulous compliance with his wishes while 
volunteering none of her own. 

“You don’t seem to be very impressed," he said. “But what would 
you know about business, anyway'* You wouldn't be able to under- 
stand anything on so large a scale. Wait till September second. Wait 
till they hear about it.” 

“They ? Who?” 

He glanced at her, as it he had let a dangerous word slip out 
involuntarily. “We've organized a setup where we~ me, Orren and 
a few friends — are going to control every industrial property south 
of the border.” 

“Whose property?" 

“Why . . . the people's. This is not an old-fashioned grab lor 
private profit. It’s a deal with a mission — a worthy, public-spirited 
mission— to manage the nationalized properties of the various Peo- 
ple’s States of South America, to teach their workers our modern 
techniques of production, to help the underprivileged who've never 
had a chance, to— •” He broke off abruptly, though she had merely 
sat looking at him without shifting her glance. “You know.” he said 
suddenly, with a cold little chuckle, “if you’re so damn anxious to 
hide that you came from the slums, you ought to be less indillerent 
to the philosophy of social welfare. It’s always the poor who lack 
humanitarian instincts. One has to be born to wealth in order to 
know the finer feelings of altruism.” 

“I’ve never tried to hide that 1 came from the slums,” she said in 
the simple, impersonal tone of a factual correction. “And 1 haven’t 
any sympathy for that welfare philosophy. I’ve seen enough of them 
to know what makes the kind of poor who want something for noth- 
ing.” He did not answer, and she added suddenly, her voice aston- 
ished, but firm, as if in final confirmation of a long-standing doubt, 
“Jim, you don’t care about it either, ^ou don’t care about any of 
that welfare bogwash.” 

“Well, if money is all that you're interested in,” he snapped, “let 
me tell you that that deal will bring me | fortune. That’s what you've 
always admired, isn’t it, wealth?” 

“It depends.” 

“I think I’ll end up as one of the richest men in the world,” he 
said; he did not ask what her admiration depended upon. “There’s 

796 



nothing I won’t be able to afford. Nothing. Just name it. I can give 
you anything you want. Go on, name it.” 

“I don’t want anything, Jim.” 

“But I’d like to give you a present! To celebrate the occasion, 
see? Anything you take it into your head to ask. Anything. I can do 
it. I want to show you that I can do it. Any fancy you care to name.” 

“I haven’t any fancies.” 

“Oh, come on! Want a yacht?” 

“No.” 

“Want me to buy you the whole neighborhood where you lived 
in Buffalo?” 

“No.” 

“Want the eiown jewels of the People’s State of England? They 
can be had, you know. That People’s State has been hinting about 
it on the black market for a long time. But there aren’t any old- 
fashioned tycoons left who’re able to afford it. I'm able to afford 
it— or will be, after September second. Want it?” 

“No.” 

“Then what do you want?” 

“I don’t want anything, Jim.” 

“But you’ve got to' You’ve got to want something, damn you!” 

She looked at him, faintly startled, but otherwise indifferent. 

“Oh, all right. I’m sorry,” he said; he seemed astonished by his 
own outbreak. “I just wanted to please you.” he added sullenly, “but 
f guess you can't understand it at all. You don’t know how important 
it is. You don’t know how big a man you’re married to ’’ 

“I'm trying to find out,” she said slowly. 

“Do you still think, as you used to, that Hank Rcarden is a 
great man?” 

“Yes, Jim, 1 do.” 

“Well. I’ve got him beaten. I’m greater than anv of them, greater 
than Rearden and greater than that other lover of my sister’s, who—-” 
He stopped, as if he had slid too fai. 

“Jim ” she asked evenly, “what's going to happen on September 
second?” 

He glanced up at hei. from under his forehead — a cold glance, 
with his muscles creased into a semi-smile, as d in cynical breach of 
some hallowed restraint: “They’re going to nationalize d’ Ancon ia 
C opper.” he said. 

He heard the long, harsh roll of a motor, as a plane went by 
somewheie m the darkness above the roof then a thin tinkle, as a 
piece of ice settled melting, in the silver bowl of his fruit cup— before 
she answered. She said, “He was your fiicnd. wasn’t he?” 

“Oh, shut up'” 

He remained silent, not looking at her When his eyes came back 
to her face, she was still watching him arid she spoke first, her voice 
oddly stern: “What youi sister did in her radio broadcast was great.” 

“Yes, J know. 1 know, you’ve been saying that for a month,” 

“You’ve never answered me.” 

“What is there to ans . . ?” 

“Just as your friends in Washington have never answered her.” 

797 



He remained silent. “Jim, Pm not dropping the subject.*’ He did not 
answer. “Your friends in Washington never uttered a word about it. 
They did not deny the things she said, they did not explain, they did 
nn» try to justify themselves. They acted as if she had never spoken. 
I think they’re hoping that people will forget it. Some people will. 
But the rest of us know what she said and that your friends were 
afraid to fight her.” 

“That’s not true! The proper action was taken and the incident is 
closed and 1 don’t see why you keep bringing it up.” 

“What action?” 

“Bertram Scudder was taken oft the air, as a program not in the 
public interest at the present time.” 

“Does that answer her?” 

“It dosed the issue and there's nothing more to be said about it.” 

“About a government that works by blackmail and extortion?” 

“You can’t say that nothing was done. It’s been publicly an- 
nounced that Scudder’s programs were disruptive, destructive and 
untrustworthy.” 

“Jim, f want to understand this. Scudder wasn’t on her side— he 
was on yours. He didn’t even arrange that broadcast. He was acting 
on orders from Washington, wasn’t he?” 

“1 thought you didn't like Bertram Scudder.” 

“I didn’t and I don’t, but — ” 

“Then what do you care?” 

“But he was innocent, as far as your friends were concerned, 
wasn’t he?” 

“1 wish you wouldn't bother with polities. You talk like a fool ” 

“He was innocent, wasn’t he?” 

“So what?” 

She looked at him, her eyes incredulously wide. “Then they just 
made him the scapegoat, didn’t they?” 

“Oh, don’t sit there looking like Eddie Willers!” 

“Do I? I like Eddie Willers. He's honest.” 

“He’s a damn half-wit who doesn’t have the faintest idea of how' 
to deal with practical reality!” 

“But you do, don’t you, Jim?” 

“You bet I do!” 

“Then couldn’t you have helped Scudder?” 

“/?” He burst into helpless, angry laughter. “Oh, why don’t you 
grow up? I did my best to get Scudder thrown to the lions! Some- 
body had to be. Don’t you know that it was my neck, if some other 
hadn’t been found?” 

“ Your neck? Why not Dagny’s, it sfic was wrong? Because she 
wasn’t?” r 

“Dagny is an entirely different category! It had to be Scuddei 
or me.” 

“Why?” 

“And it’s much better for national pdlicy to let it be Scudder. This 
way, it’s not necessary to argue about \tfhat she said — and if anybody 
brings it up, we start howling that it w£s said on Scudder’s program 
and that Scudder’s programs have been discredited and that Scuddei 

798 



is a proven fraud and liar* etc., etc. — and do you think the public 
will be able to unscramble it? Nobody’s ever trusted Bertram Scud- 
der, anyway. Oh, don’t stare at me like that! Would you rather they’d 
picked me to discredit?” 

“Why not Dagny? Because her speech could not be discredited?” 

“If you’re so damn sorry for Bertram Scudder, you should have 
seen him try his damndest to make them break my neck! He's been 
doing that for years — how do you think he’ got to where he was, 
except by climbing on carcasses? He thought he was pretty powerful, 
too — you should have seen how the big business tycoons used to be 
afraid of him! But he got himself out maneuvered, this time. This 
time* he belonged to the wrong faction.” 

Dimly, thtough the pleasant stupor of relaxing, of sprawling back 
in his chair and smiling, he knew that this was the enjoyment he 
wanted, to be himself lo be himself— he thought, in the drugged, 
precarious state of floating past the deadliest of his blind alleys, the 
one that led to the question of what was himself. 

“You see, he belonged to the Tinky Holloway faction. It was 
prelty much of a seesaw for a while, between the Tinky Holloway 
faction and the Cluck Morrison faction. But we won Tinky made a 
deal and agreed to scuttle his pal Bertram in exchange for a few 
things he needed from us. You should have heard Bertram howl! 
But he was a dead duck and lie knew it ” 

He started on a rolling chuckle, but choked it off, as the haze 
cleai oil and he saw lus wife's face. "'Jim.” she whispered, “is that 
the sort of . . victories you’re winning?” 

“Oh, for Christ's sake!” he screamed, smashing his fist down on 
the table. “Where have you been all these years? What sort of world 
do you think you're living in?” His blow had upset his water glass 
and the water went spreading in dark stains over the lace of the 
tablecloth. 

“I'm trying to find out,” she whispered Her shoulders were sag- 
ging and her face looked suddenly worn, an odd, aged look that 
seemed haggard and lost. 

“1 couldn’t help it!” he burst out m the silence. “I’m not to blame! 

I have to lake things as 1 find them! It’s not l who've made this 
world!” 

He was shocked to see that she smiled— a smile of so fiercely 
bitter a contempt that it seemed incredible on her gently patient 
face; she was not looking at him. but at some image of her own. 
“That's what my father used lo say when he got drunk at the corner 
saloon instead of looking for work,” 

“How dare you try comparing me to—-” he started, but did not 
finish, because she was not listening. 

Her words, when she looked at him again, astonished him as com- 
pletely irrelevant “The date of that nationalization, September sec- 
ond,” she asked, her voice wistful, “was it you who picked it?” 

“No. I had nothing to do with it. It’s the date of some special 
session of their legislature. Why?” 

“It’s the date of our first wedding anniversary.” 

“Oh? Oh, that’s right!” He smiled, relieved at the change to a 

799 



safe subjeet “We’ll have been married a year. My, it doesn’t seem 
that long!” 

“It seems much longer,” she said tonelessly. 

She was looking off again, and he felt in sudden uneasiness that 
the subject was not safe at all; he wished she would not look as if 

she were seeing the whole course of that year and of their marriage 

not to get scared, but to leant— she thought — the thing to do is not 
to get scared, but to learn . . . The words came from a sentence she 
had repeated to herself so often that it felt like a pillar polished 
smooth by the helpless weight of her body, the pillar that had sup- 
ported her through the past year. She tried to repeat it, but she fell 
as if her hands were slipping on the polish, as if the sentence would 
not stave off terror any longer — bccau.se she was beginning to 
understand. 

If you don’t know, the thing to do is not to get scared, but to 
learn. ... It was m the bewildered loneliness of the first weeks of 
her marriage that she said it to herself for the first lime. She could 
not understand Jim's behavior, or his sullen anger, which looked like 
weakness, or his evasive, incomprehensible answers to her questions, 
which sounded like cowardice; such trails were not possible in the 
James Taggart whom she had married. She told herself that she 
could not condemn without understanding, that she knew nothing 
about his world, that the extent of her ignorance was the extent to 
which she misinterpreted his actions. She took the blame, she took 
the beating of self-reproach — against some bleakly stubborn certainty 
which told her that something was wrong and that the thing she felt 
was fear. 

“I must learn everything thai Mrs. James Taggart is expected to 
know and to be,” was the way she explained her purpose to a teacher 
of etiquette. She set out to learn with the devotion, the discipline, 
the drive of a military cadet or a religious novice. It was the only 
way, she thought, of earning the height which her husband had 
granted her on trust, of living up to his vision of her. which it was 
now her duty to achieve. And, not wishing to confess it to herself 
she felt also that at the end of the long task she would lccapture 
her vision of him, that knowledge would bring back to her the man 
she had seen on the night of his railroad’s triumph. 

She could not understand Jim's attitude when she told him about 
her lessons. He burst out laughing; she was unable to believe that 
the laughter had a sound of malicious contempt. “Wh#, Jim? Why? 
What are you laughing at ?” He would not explain — almost as il the 
fact of his contempt were suttieient and required no reasons. 

She could not suspect him of malice: hp was too patiently generous 
about her mistakes. He seemed eager* to display her in the best 
drawing rooms of the city, and he nevec uttered a word of reproach 
for her ignorance, for her awkwardness^ for those terrible moments 
when a silent exchange ot glances amofcg the guests and a burst of 
blood to her cheekbones told her that she had said the wrong thing 
again. He showed no embarrassment, hi merely watched her with a 
faint smile. When they came home, aft^r one of those evenings, his 

800 



mood seemed affectionately cheerful. He was trying to make it easier 
for her, she thought— and gratitude drove her to study the harder. 

She expected her reward on the evening when, by some impercep- 
tible transition, she found herself enjoying a party for the first time, 
She felt free to act, not by rules, but at her own pleasure, with 
sudden confidence that the rules had fused into a natural habit— she 
knew that she was attracting attention, but now, for the first time, it 
was not the attention of ridicule, but of admiration— she was sought 
after, on her own merit, she was Mrs. Taggait. she had ceased being 
an object of charity weighing Jim down, painfully tolerated for his 
sake— she was laughing gaily and seeing the smiles of response, of 
appreciation on the faces around her — and she kept glancing at him 
across the room, radiantly, like a child handing him a report card 
with a perfect score, begging him to be proud of her. Jim sat alone 
in a corner, watching her with an undecipherable glance. 

He would not speak to her on their way home. “I don’t know why 
1 keep dragging myself to those parties.” he snapped suddenly, tear- 
ing off his dress tie in the middle of their living room. ‘Tve never 
sat through such a vulgar, boring waste of time!” “Why. Jim,” she 
said, stunned, “I thought it was wonderful.” “You would! You 
seemed to be quite at home — quite as if it were Coney Island. I wish 
you'd learn to keep your place and not to embarrass me in public.” 
“I embarrassed you? Tonight ?” “ You did!” “How?” “If you don’t 
understand it, I can’t explain.” he said in the tone of a mystic who 
implies that a lack of understanding is the confession of a shameful 
inferiority. “1 don’t understand it,” she said firmly. He walked out 
of the mom, slamming the door. 

She felt that the inexplicable was not a mere blank, this time: it 
had a tinge of evil. From that night on, a small, hard point of fear 
remained within her, like the spot of a distant headlight advancing 
upon her down an invisible track. 

Knowledge did not seem to bring her a clearer vision of Jim’s 
world, but to make the mysteiy greater. She could not believe that 
she was supposed to feel respect for the dreary senselessness of the art 
shows which his friends attended, of the novels they read, of the 
political magazines they discussed — the art shows, where she saw the 
kind of drawings she had seen chalked on any pavement of her 
childhood’s slums — the novels, that purported to prove the futility 
of science, industry, civilization and love, using language that her 
father would not have used in his drunkenest moments— the maga- 
zines, that propounded cowardly generalities, less clear and more 
stale than the sermons for which she had condemned the preacher 
of the slum mission as a mealy-mouthed old fraud. She aiuld not 
believe that these things were the culture she had so reverently 
looked up to and so eagerly waited to discover. She felt as if she 
had climbed a mountain toward a jagged shape that had looked like 
a castle and had found it to be the crumbling ruin of a gutted 
warehouse. 

“Jim,” she said once, after an evening spent among the men who 
were called the intellectual leaders of the country, “Dr. Simon Prit- 
chett is a phony — a mean, scared old phony.” “Now, really,” he 

801 



answered, “do you think you’re qualified to pass judgment on philos- 
ophers?’ 4 “I’m qualified to pass judgment on con men. I’ve seen 
enough of them to know one when I see him.” “Now this is why I 
say that you’ll never outgrow your background. If you had, you 
would have learned to appreciate Dr. Pritchett’s philosophy." “What 
philosophy?” “If you don’t understand it, l can’t explain." She would 
not let him end the conversation on that favorite foimula of his. 
“Jim.” she said, “he’s a phony, he and Balph Eubank and that whole 
gang of theirs— and 1 think you’ve been taken in by them.” Instead 
of the anger she expected, she saw a brief flash of amusement in the 
lift of his eyelids. “That’s what you think,” he answered. 

She felt an instant of terror at the first touch of a concept she had 
not known to be possible: What if Jim was not taken in by them? 
She could understand the phoniness of Dr. Pritchett, she thought — 
it was a racket that gave him an undeserved income; she could even 
admit the possibility, by now, that Jim might be a phony in his own 
business; what she could not hold inside her mind was the concept 
of Jim as a phony in a racket from which he gained nothing, an 
unpaid phony, an unvenal phony; the phoniness of a cardsharp or a 
con man seemed innocently wholesome by comparison. She could 
not conceive of his motive; she felt only that the headlight moving 
upon her had grown larger. 

She could not remember by what steps, what accumulation of pain, 
first as small scratches of uneasiness, then as stabs of bewilderment, 
then as the chronic, nagging pull of fear, she had begun to doubt 
Jim’s position on the railroad. It was his sudden, angry “so you don't 
trust me 9 ” snapped in answer to her first, innocent questions that 
made her realize that she did not-— when the doubt had not yet 
formed in her mind and she had fully expected that his answers would 
reassure her. She had learned, in the slums of her childhood, that 
honest people were never touchy about the matter of being trusted. 

“I don’t care to talk shop.” was his answer whenever she men- 
tioned the railroad. She tried to plead with him once. “Jim. you 
know what I think of your work and how much I admire you for 
it.” “Oh, really? What is it you married, a man or a railroad presi- 
dent?” “I , . . i never thought ot separating the two.” “Well, it is not 
very flattering to me.” She looked at him, baffled: she had thought it 
was. “I’d like to believe,” he said, “that you love me for myself, and 
not for my railroad.” “Oh God, Jim.” she gasped, “you didn't think 
that 1 — !” “No,” he said, with a sadly generous smile, “I didn’t think 
that you married me for my money or my position. / have never 
doubted you.” Realizing, in stunned copfusion and in tortured fair- 
ness, that she might have given him ground to misinterpret her feel- 
ing, that she had forgotten how many bitter disappointments he must 
have suffered at the hands of fortune-h|Linting women, she could do 
nothing but shake her head and moan,; “Oh, Jim, that’s not what I 
meant!” He chuckled softly, as at a chihj, and slipped his arm around 
her. “Do you love me?” he asked. “Ye%” she whispered. “Then you 
must have faith in me. Love is faith, you know. Don’t you see that 

802 



I need it? I don’t trust anyone around me, l have nothing but ene- 
mies, I am very lonely. Don't you know that I need you’?” 

The thing that made her pace her room— hours later, m tortured 
restlessness— was that she wished desperately to believe him and did 
not believe a word of it, yet knew that it was true. 

Jt was true, but not in the manner he implied, not in any manner 
or meaning she could ever hope to grasp. It was true that he needed 
her, but the nature of his need kept slipping past her every effort to 
define it She did not know what he wanted ot her. It was not flattery 
that he wanted, she had seen him listening to the obsequious compli- 
ments of liars, listening with a look ol resentful inertness — almost 
the look of a drug addict at a dose inadequate to rouse him. But 
she had seen him took at her as if he were waiting for some reviving 
shot and. at times, as if he were begging. She had seen a flicker of 
life in his eyes whenever she granted him some sign of admiration- 
vet a burst ot anger was his answer, whenever she named a leason 
for admiring him. He seemed to want her to consider him great, but 
never dare ascribe any specific content to his greatness. 

She did not understand the night, in mid-April, when he retained 
from a trip to Washington. “Hi, kid!” he said loudly, dropping a 
sheaf of lilac into her arms. “Happy days are here again! Just saw 
those flowers and thought of you. Spring is coming, baby!” 

He poured himself a drink and paced the 100m, talking with loo 
light, too brash a manner of gaiety. There was a feverish sparkle in 
his eyes, and his voice seemed shredded by some unnatural excite- 
ment. She began to wonder whether he was elated or crushed. 

“1 know what it is that they’re planning!” he said suddenly, with- 
out transition, and she glanced up at him swiftly: she knew 7 the sound 
of one of his inner explosions. ‘There's not a dozen people in the 
whole country who know it, but I do! The top boys are keeping it 
secret till they’re ready to spring it on the nation. Will it surprise a 
lot of people! Will it knock them flat! A lot of people? Hell, every 
single person in this country! It will affect every single person. That's 
how important it is.” 

‘Affect —how, Jim?’’ 

“It will affect them! And they don't know what’s coming, but I 
do. There they sit tonight” — he waved at the lighted windows of the 
city — “making plans, counting then money, hugging their children 
or their dreams, and they don’t know, but I do, that all of it will be 
struck, stopped, changed!” 

“Changed — for the worse or the better?” 

“For the bcttcT, of course,” he answered impatiently, as if it were 
irrelevant; his voice seemed to lose its fire and to slip into the fraudu- 
lent sound of duty. “It’s a plan to save the country, to stop our 
economic decline, to hold things still, to achieve stability and 
security.” 

“What plan?” 

“I can’t tell you. It’s secret. Top secret. You have no idea how 
many people would like to know it. There’s no industrialist who 
wouldn’t give a dozen of his best furnaces for just one hint of warn- 
ing, which he’s not going to get! Like Hank Rearden, for instance, 

803 



whom you admire so much.'* He chuckled, looking off into the 
future. 

“Jim.” she asked, the sound of fear in her voice, telling him what 
the sound of his chuckle had been like, “why do you hate Hank 
Rearden?” 

“I don't hate him!” He whirled to her, and his face, incredibly, 
looked anxious, almost frightened. “1 nevci said 1 hated him. Don't 
worry, hell approve of the plan. Everybody will. It’s for everybody’s 
good.” He sounded as if he were pleading. She felt the dizzying 
certainty that he was lying, yet that the plea was sincere — as if he had 
a desperate need to reassure her, but not about the things he said. 

She forced herself to smile. “Yes, Jim, of course,” she answered, 
wondering what instinct in what impossible kind of chaos had made 
her say it as if it were her part to reassure him. 

The look she saw on his face was almost a smile and almost of 
gratitude. “I had to tell you about it tonight. I had to tell you. I 
wanted you to know what tremendous issues l deal with. You always 
talk about my work, but you don’t understand it at all. it’s so much 
wider than you imagine. You think that running a railroad is a matter 
of tracklaying and fancy metals and getting trains there on time. But 
it's not. Any underling can do that. The real heart of a railroad is 
in Washington. My job is politics. Politics. Decisions made on a na- 
tional scale, affecting everything, controlling everybody. A few words 
on paper, a directive — changing the life of every person in every 
nook, cranny and penthouse of this country!” 

“Yes, Jim,” she said, wishing to believe that he was, perhaps, a 
man of stature in the mysterious realm of Washington. 

“You'll see,” he said, pacing the room. “You think they’re power- 
ful — those giants of industry who ’re so clever with motors and fur- 
naces? They’ll be stopped! They’ll be stripped! They’ll be brought 
down! They’ll be — ” He noticed the way she was staring at him 
“It’s not for ourselves,” he snapped hastily, “it’s for the people 
That’s the difference between business and politics — we have no 
selfish ends in view, no private motives, we’re not after profit, wc 
don’t spend our lives scrambling for money, we don’t have to! That’s 
why we’re slandered and misunderstood by all the greedy 
profitchasers who can't conceive of a spiritual motive or a moral 
ideal or . . . We couldn’t help it!” he cried suddenly, whirling to her 
“We had to have that plan! With everything falling to pieces and 
stopping, something had to be done! We had to stop them from 
stopping! We couldn't help it!” 

His eyes were desperate; she did not know whether he was boast- 
ing or begging for forgiveness; she d|d not know whether this was 
triumph or terror. “Jim, don’t you feil well? Maybe you’ve worked 
too hard and you’re worn out and — 

“I’ve never felt better in my life!” jhe snapped, resuming. his pac- 
ing. “You bet I’ve worked hard. My Work is bigger than any job you 
can hope to imagine. It’s above anything that grubbing mechanics, 
like Rearden and my sister, are doing. Whatever they do, 1 can undo 
it. Let them build a track — I can coirie and break it, just like that!” 
He snapped his fingers. “Just like breaking a spine!” 

804 



“You want to break spines?” she whispered, trembling, 

“l haven’t said that!” he screamed. “What’s the matter with you? 
I haven’t said it!” 

“I’m sorry, Jim!” she gasped, shocked by her own words and by 
the terror in his eyes, “It’s just that 1 don’t understand, but . , . but 
I know I shouldn’t bother you with questions when you’re so 
tired’—she was struggling desperately to convince herself-— “when 
you have so many things on your mind . . . such . . . such great 
things . . . things l can’t even begin to think of . 

His shoulders sagged, relaxing. He approached her and dropped 
wearily down on his knees, slipping his arms around her. “You poor 
little fool,” he said affectionately. 

She held onto him, moved by something that felt like tenderness 
and almost like pity. But he raised his head to glance up at her face, 
and it seemed to her that the look she saw in his eyes was part- 
gratification, part-contempt — almost as if. by some unknown kind of 
sanction, she had absolved him and damned herself. 

It was useless — she found in the days that followed— to tell heiself 
that these things were beyond her understanding, that it was her 
duly to believe in him, that love was faith. Her doubt kept growing- 
doubt of his incomprehensible work and of his relation to the rail- 
load. She wondered why it kept growing in direct proportion to her 
self-admonitions that faith was the duty she owed him. Then, one 
sleepless night, she realized that her effort to fulfill that duty con- 
sisted of turning away whenever people discussed his job. of refusing 
to look at newspaper mentions of Taggart Transcontinental, of slam- 
ming her mind shut against any evidence and every contradiction. 
She stopped, aghast, struck by the question What is it. then— faith 
versus truth? And realizing that part of her zeal to believe was her 
tear to know, she set out to learn the truth, with a cleanei, calmer 
sense of rightness than the effort as dutiful sell-fraud had ever 
given her. 

It did not take her long to learn The evasiveness ol the Taggart 
executives, when she asked a few casual questions, the stale generali- 
ties ol their answers, the strain of their manner at the mention of 
their boss, and their obvious reluctance to discuss him — told her 
nothing concrete, but gave her a feeling equivalent to knowing the 
worst, lhe railroad workers were moie specific — the switchmen, the 
gatemen, the ticket sellers whom she drew into chance conversations 
in the Taggart Tciminal and who did not know her. “Jim Taggart? 
That whining, sniveling, speech-making deadhead!" “Jimmy the 
President? Well, I’ll tell you* he's the hobo on the gravy train." “The 
boss? Mr. Taggart? You mean M/av Taggart, don't you?" 

It was Tdche Willers who told her the whole truth. She heard that 
he had known Jim since childhood, and she asked him to lunch with 
her. When she laced him at the table, when she saw the earnest, 
questioning directness of his eyes and the severely literal simplicity 
of his woids, she dropped all attempts at casual prodding, she told 
him what she wanted to know and why, briefly, impersonally, not 
appealing for help or for pity, only for truth. He answered her in 
the same manner. He told her the whole story, quietly, impersonally, 

805 



pronouncing no verdict, expressing no opinion, never encroaching 
on her emotions by any sign of concern for them, speaking with the 
shining austerity and the awesome power of facts. He tofd her who 
ran Taggart Transcontinental. He told her the story of the John Galt 
Line. She listened, and what she telt was not shock, but worse: the 
lack of shock, as if she had always known it. “Thank you, Mr. Will- 
ers," was all that she said when he finished. 

She waited for Jim to come home, that evening, and the thing that 
eroded any pain or indignation, was a feeling of her own detachment, 
as if it did not matter to her any longer, as if some action were 
required of her, but it made no difference what the action would be 
or the consequences. 

It was not anger that she felt when she saw Jim enter the room, 
but a murky astonishment, almost as if she wondered who he was 
and why it should now be necessary to speak to him She told him 
what she knew, briefly, in a tired, extinguished voice. It seemed to 
her that he understood it from her first few sentences, as if he had 
expected this to come sooner or later 

“Why didn't you tell me the truth?" she asked. 

“So that’s your idea of gratitude 7 " he screamed. “So that’s how 
you feel after everything I’ve done for you? Everybody told me that 
crudeness and selfishness was all 1 could expect for lifting a cheap 
little alley cat by the scruff of her neck!" 

She looked at him as if he were making inarticulate sounds that 
connected to nothing inside her mind “Why didn’t you tell me the 
truth?" 

“Is that all the love you fell for me, you sneaky little hypocrite? 
Is that all I get in return for my faith in you?" 

“Why did you lie? Why did you let me think what I thought?” 

“You should be ashamed of yourself, you should he ashamed to 
face me or speak to me!" 

“I?" The inarticulate sounds had connected, but she could not 
believe the sum they made. “What are you trying to do, Jim?” she 
asked, her voice incredulous and distant. 

“Have you thought of my feelings? Have you thought of what this 
would do to my feelings? You should have considered my feelings 
first! That’s the first obligation of any wife — and of a woman in your 
position in particular! There’s nothing lower and uglier than 
ingratitude!" 

For the flash of one instant, she grasped the unthinkable fact ol a 
man who was guilty and knew it and was trying to escape by inducing 
an emotion of guilt in his victim. But she could not hold the fact 
inside her brain. She felt a stab of hoiror, the convulsion of a mind 
rejecting a sight that would destroy it — a s(ab like a swift recoil from 
the edge of insanity. By the time she dropped her head, closing her 
eyes, she knew only that she felt disgust* a sickening disgust for a 
nameless reason. 

When she raised her head, it seemed Uo her that she caught a 
glimpse of him watching her with the underlain, retreating, calculat- 
ing look of a man whose trick had not worked. But before she had 

806 



time to believe it, his face was hidden again under an expression of 
injury and anger. 

She said, as it she were naming her thoughts for the benefit of the 
rational being who was not present, but whose presence she had to 
assume, since no other could be addressed, “That night . . . those 
headlines . . . that glory ... it was not you at all . . . it was Dagny,” 

“Shut up, you rotten little bitch!” 

She looked at him blankly, without reaction. She looked as if noth- 
mg could reach her, because her dying words had been uttered. 

He made the sound of a sob. “Cherryl, I’m sorry. I didn’t mean 
it, 1 take it back, I didn't mean it . . 

She remained standing, leaning against the wall, as she had stood 
from the first. 

He dropped down on the edge of a couch, in a posture of helpless 
dejection. “How could 1 have explained it to you?” ho said in the 
tone of abandoning hope. “Ifs all so big and so complex. How could 
1 have told you anything about a transcontinental railroad, unless 
you knew ail the details and ramifications? How could I have e\- 
plained to you my years of work, my - . . Oh, what’s the use? I’ve 
always been misunderstood and 1 should have been accustomed to 
it by now, only I thought that you were different and that I had 
a chance.” 

“Jim, why did you marry me?" 

He chuckled sadly. “That's what everybody kept asking me. I 
didn’t think you'd ever ask it. Why 7 Because I love you.” 

She wondered at how strange it was that this word— which was 
supposed to be the simplest in the human language, the word under- 
stood by all, the uni\ersal bond among men — conveyed to her no 
meaning whatever She did not know what it was that it named in 
his mind. 

“Nobody's ever loved me.” he said. “There isn’t unv love m the 
world. People don't feel. 1 feel things. Who cares about that? All 
they care for is time schedules and freight loads and money. I can’t 
live among those people. I'm very lonely. I’\e always longed to find 
understanding. Maybe Pm just a hopeless idealist, looking for the 
impossible. Nobody will ever understand me.” 

“Jim,” she said, with an odd little note of severity in her voice, 
“what I've struggled for all this time is to understand you.” 

He dropped his hand in a motion of brushing her words aside, not 
offensively, but sadly, “I thought you could. You’re all I have. But 
maybe understanding is just not possible between human beings.” 

“Why should it be impossible? Why don’t you tell me what it is 
that you want? Why don’t you help me to understand you?” 

He sighed. “That’s it. That’s the trouble- your asking all those 
why’s. Your constant asking of a why for everything. What I’m talk- 
ing about can’t be put into words. It can’t be named. It has to be 
felt. Either you feel it or you don’t It’s not a thing of the mind, but 
of the heart. Don't you ever feel? Just feel , without asking all those 
questions? Can’t you understand me as a human being, not as if I 
were a scientific object in a laboratory? The greater understanding 
that transcends our shabby words and helpless minds , . . No, l guess 

807 



I shouldn’t look for it. But I’ll always seek and hope. You’re my last 
hope. You’re all I have.” 

She stood at the wall, without moving. 

”1 need you,” he wailed softly. ‘Tm all alone. You’re not like the 
others. I believe in you. I trust you. What has all that money and 
fame and business and struggle given me? You’re all I have . . 

She stood without moving and the direction of her glance, lowered 
to look down at him, was the only form of recognition she gave him. 
The things he said about his suffering were lies, she thought; but the 
suffering was real; he was a man torn by some continual anguish, 
which he seemed unable to tell her, but which, perhaps, she could 
learn to understand. She still owed him this much — she thought, with 
the grayness of a sense of duty — in payment for the position he had 
given her, which, perhaps, was all he had to give, she owed him an 
effort to understand him. 

It was strange to feel, in the days that followed, that she had 
become a stranger to herself, a stranger who had nothing to want 
or to seek. In place ot a love made by the brilliant (ire of hero 
worship, she was left with the gnawing drabness of pity. In place ol 
the men she had struggled to find, men who fought for their goals 
and refused to suffer — she was left with a man whose suffering was 
his only claim lo value and his only offer in exchange for her life. 
But it made no difference to her any longer. The one who was she. 
had looked with eagerness at the turn of every coiner ahead, the 
passive stranger who had taken hei place, was like all the over 
groomed people aiound her, the people who said that they were 
adult because they did not lr> to think or desire. 

But the stranger was still haunted by a ghost who wa> hoi self, and 
the ghost had a mission to accomplish She had to learn to under- 
stand the things that had destroyed her. She had to know, and she 
lived with a sense of ceaseless waiting. She had to know, even though 
she felt that the headlight was closci and in the moment of knowl 
edge she would he struck by the wheels 

What do you want ol me? — was the question that kept beating m 
her mind as a clue. What do you want of me? she kept ciying 
soundlessly, at dinner tables, in drawing rooms, on sleepless nights 
crying it to Jim and those who seemed to share his secret, to Balph 
Eubank, to Dr. Simon Pritchett -what do you want of me? She did 
not ask it aloud; she knew that they would not answer. What do you 
want of me? — she asked, feeling as if she were running, but no way 
were open to escape. What do you want of me” — she asked, looking 
at the whole long torture of her marriage that had not lasted the 
full span ot one year 

”What do you want of rne?” she askcfl aloud— and saw that she 
was sitting at the table in her dining rojom. looking at Jim, at his 
feverish face, and at a drying stain of waiter on the table. 

She did not know how long a span of silence had stretched be- 
tween them, she was startled by her own! voice and by the question 
she had not intended to utter. She did nek expect him to understand 
it, he bad never seemed to understand much simpler queries — and 
she shook her head, struggling to recapture the reality of the present 

808 



She was startled to see him looking at her with a touch of derision, 
as if he were mocking her estimate of his understanding. 

“Love,” he answered. 

She felt herself sagging with hopelessness, in the face of that an- 
swer which was at once so simple and so meaningless. 

“You don't love me,” he said accusingly. She did not answer. 
“You don’t love me or you wouldn’t ask such a question.” 

“1 did love you once,” she said dully, “but it wasn’t what you 
wanted. I loved you for your courage, your ambition, your ability. 
But it wasn’t real, any of it.” 

His lower lip swelled a little in a faint, contemptuous thrust. “What 
a shabby idea of love!” he said. 

“Jim, what is it that you want to be loved for?” 

“What a cheap shopkeeper’s attitude!” 

She did not speak; she looked at him, her eyes stretched by a 
silent question. 

“To be loved fori" he said, his voice grating with mockery and 
righteousness. “So you think that love is a matter of mathematics, 
of exchange, of weighing and measuring, like a pound of butter on 
a grocery counter 7 l don’t want to be loved for anything. 1 want to 
he loved for mysell — not for anything 1 do or have or say or think 
for myself ' not tor my body or mind or words or works or actions.” 

“But then . , . what is yourself?” 

“11 you loved me. you wouldn't ask it,” His voice had a shrill note 
of nervousness, as if he were swaying dangerously between caution 
and some blindly heedless impulse. “You wouldn’t ask. You'd know. 
You’d feel it. Why do you always try to tag and label everything? 
C an't you rise above those petty materialistic definitions? Don't you 
ever t eel— just /tv/?” 

“Yes, Jim. 1 do,” she said, her voice low. “But 1 am trying not to, 
because , . because what 1 feel is fear.” 

“Of me?” he asked hopefully 

“No. not exactly. Not tear of what you can do to me. but of what 
you are.” 

He dropped his eyelids with the swiftness of slamming a door — 
but she caught a flash of his eyes and the flash, incredibly, was terror. 
“You’re not capable of love, you cheap little gold-digger!” he cried 
suddenly, in a tone stripped of all color but the desiie to hurt. “Yes, 
1 said gold-digger. There are many forms of it. other than greed for 
money, other and worse. You're a gold-digger of the spirit. You 
didn’t marry nre for my cash— but you married me for my ability 
or courage or whatever value it was that you set as the price of 
your love!” 

“Do you want . . . love . , . to be . , . causeless?” 

“Love is its own cause! Love is above causes and reasons. Love 
is blind. But you wouldn’t be capable of it. You have the mean, 
scheming, calculating little soul of a shopkeeper who trades, but 
never gives! Love is a gift — a great, free, unconditional gift that tran- 
scends and forgives everything. What's the generosity of loving a 
man for his virtues? What do you give him? Nothing. It’s no more 
than cold justice. No more than he’s earned.” 

809 



Her eyes were dark with the dangerous intensity of glimpsing her 
goal. “You want it to be unearned,’' she said, not in' the tone of a 
question, but of a verdict. 

“Oh, you don't understand!" 

“Yes, Jim, 1 do. That’s what you want — that’s what all of you 
really want — not money, not material benefits, not economic security, 
not any of the handouts you keep demanding." She spoke in a fiat 
monotone, as if reciting her thoughts to herself, intent upon giving 
the solid identity of words to the torturous shreds of chaos twisting 
in her mind. “All of you welfare preachers — it’s not unearned money 
that you’re after You want handouts, but of a different kind. I’m a 
gold-digger of the spirit, you said, because I look for value. Then 
you, the welfare preachers . . it’s the spirit that you want to loot. 
I never thought and nobody ever told us how it could be thought ot 
and what it would mean— the unearned in spirit. But that is what 
you want. You want unearned love. You want unearned admiration. 
You want unearned greatness. You want to be a man like Hank 
Rcarden without the necessity ol being what he is. Without the ne- 
cessity of being anything. Without . . the necessity . . . ot being " 

“Shut up!" he screamed. 

They looked at each other, both in terror, both feeling as if they 
were swavmg on an edge which she could not and he would not 
name, both knowing that one more step would be fatal. 

“What do you think you're saying?" he asked in a tone of petty 
anger, which sounded almost benevolent by bringing them back into 
the realm of the normal, into the near-wholesomeness of nothing 
worse than a family quarrel. “What sort of metaphysical subject are 
you trying to deal with?" 

“1 don’t know . . she said wearily, dropping her head, as if some 
shape she had tried to capture had slipped once more out of her 
grasp. “I don’t know ... It doesn't seem possible . . ." 

“You’d better not try to wade in way over your head or--" But 
he had to stop, because the butler entered, bringing the glittering 
ice bucket with the champagne oidered for celebration. 

They remained silent, letting the room be filled by the sounds 
which centuries of men and of struggle had established as the symbol 
of joyous attainment: the blast of the cork, the laughing tinkle of a 
pale gold liquid running into iwo broad cups filled with the weaving 
reflections of candles, the whisper of bubbles rising through two crys- 
tal stems, almost demanding that everything m sight rise, too, in the 
same aspiration. 

They remained silent, till the butler bad gone. Taggart sat looking 
down at the bubbles, holding the stem of his glass between two 
limply casual fingers. Then his hand clpsed suddenly about the stem 
into an awkwardly convulsed fist and be raised it, not as one lifts a 
glass of champagne, but as one would Ilift a butcher knife. 

“To Francisco d’Anconia!" he said. ! 

She put her glass down. “No," she answered. 

“Drink it!" he screamed. 

“No," she answered, her voice like 8 drop of lead, 

810 



They held each other’s glances for a moment, the light playing on 
the golden liquid, not reaching their faces or eyes. 

“Oh, go to hell!” he cried, leaping to his feet, flinging his glass to 
smash on the floor, and rushing out of the room. 

She sat at the table, not moving, for a long time, then rose slowly 
and pressed the bell. 

She walked to her room, her steps unnaturally even, she opened 
the door of a closet, she reached for a suit and a pair of shoes, she 
took off the housecoat, moving with cautious precision, as if her life 
depended on not jarring anything about or within her. She held onto 
a single thought: that she had to get out of this house-just get out 
of it for a while, if only for the next hour™ -and then, later, she would 
be able to face all that had to be faced. 

* * 

The lines were blurring on the paper before her and, raising her 
head, Dagny realized that it had long since grown dark. 

She pushed the papers aside, unwilling to turn on the lamp, permit- 
ting herself the luxury of idleness and darkness. It cut her off from 
the city beyond the windows of her living room. The calendar in the 
distance said: August 5. 

The month behind her had gone, leaving nolhing but the blank of 
dead time. It had gone mto the planless, thankless work of racing 
from emergency to emergency, of delaying the collapse of a rail- 
road — a month like a waste pile of disconnected days, each given to 
averting the disaster of the moment. It had not been a sum of 
achievements brought into existence, but only a sum of zeros, of that 
which had not happened, a sum of prevented catastrophes — not a 
task m the service of life, but only a race against death. 

There had been times when an unsummoned vision — a sight of 
the valley — had seemed to rise before her, not as a sudden appear- 
ance, hut as a constant, hidden presence that suddenly chose to as- 
sume an insistent reality. She had faced it. through moments of 
blinded stillness, in a contest between an unmoving decision and an 
unyielding pain, a pain to be fought by acknowledgment, by saying: 
All right, even this. 

There had been mornings when, awakening with rays ol sunlight 
on her face, she had thought that she must hurry to Hammond's 
Market to gel fresh eggs for bteakfast; then, recapturing full con- 
sciousness, seeing the haze of New York beyond the window of her 
bedroom, she had felt a tearing stab, like a touch of death, the touch 
ol rejecting reality You knew it — she had told herself .severely — you 
knew what it would be like when you made your choice. And drag- 
ging her body, like an unwilling weight, out of bed to face an unwel- 
come day, she would whisper: All nght, even this. 

The worst of the torture had been the moments when, walking 
down the street, she had caught a sudden glimpse of chestnut-gold, 
a glowing streak of hair among the heads of strangers, and had felt 
as if the city had vanished, as if nothing but the violent stillness 
within her were delaying the moment when she would rush to him 
and seize him; but that next moment had come as the sight of some 
meaningless face — and she had stood, not wishing to live through 

811 



the following step, not wishing to generate the energy of living. She 
had tried to avoid such moments; she had tried to forbid herself to 
look; she had walked, keeping her eyes on the pavements. She had 
failed; by some will of their own, her eyes had kept leaping to every 
streak of gold. 

She had kept the blinds raised on the windows of her office, re- 
membering his promise, thinking only: If you are watching me, wher- 
ever you are . . . There were no buildings close to the height of her 
office, but she had looked at the distant towers, wondering which 
window was his observation post, wondering whether some invention 
of his own. some device of rays and lenses, permitted him to observe 
her every movement from some skyscraper a block or a mile away. 
She had sat at her desk, at her uncurtained windows, thinking: Just 
to know that you’re seeing me, even if I’m never to see you again. 

And rememheiing it, now, in the darkness of her room, she leaped 
to her feet and snapped on the light. 

Then she dropped her head for an instant, smiling m mirthless 
amusement at herself. She wondered whether her lighted windows, 
in the black immensity of the city, were a flare of distress, calling 
for his help— or a lighthouse still protecting the rest of the woild. 

The doorbell rang 

When she opened the door, she saw the silhouette of a girl with 
a faintly familiar face — and it t(x>k her a moment of startled astonish- 
ment to leahze that it was Cherryl Taggart. Except for a formal 
exchange of greetings on a few chance encounters in the halls of the 
Taggart Building, they had not seen each other since the wedding. 

Cherryl’s face was composed and unsmiling. “Would you permit 
me to speak to you’* — she hesitated and ended on— “Miss 1 nggarC" 

“Of course,*’ said Dagny gravely. “Come in.” 

She sensed some desperate emergency in the unnatural calm ol 
Cherryl’s manner; she became certain of it when she looked at the 
girl's face in the light of the living loom, “Sit down,” she said, but 
Cherryl remained standing. 

“I came to pay a debt.” said Cherryl, her voice solemn with the 
effort to permit hersclt no sound of emotion, i want to apologize 
for the things I said to you at my wedding. There’s no reason why 
you should forgive me. but it’s my place to tell you that I know i 
was insulting everything I admire and defending everything I despise 
I know that admitting it now, doesn’t make up for it, and even 
coming here is only another presumption, there's no reason why you 
should want to hear it, so 1 can't even cancel the debt, 1 can only 
ask for a favor — that you let me say the things I want to say to you. 

Dagny’s shock of emotion, incredulous, warm and painful, was the 
wordless equivalent of the sentence’ What a distance to travel in less 
than a year . . . t She answered, the [unsmiling earnestness of her 
voice like a hand extended in support^ knowing that a smile would 
upset some precarious balance, “But it does make up for it, and l 
do want to hear it.” * 

“I know that it was you who ran Taggart Transcontinental, It was 
you who built the John Galt Line. It was you who had the mind and 
the courage that kept all of it alive. 1 suppose you thought that I 

812 



married Jim for his money — as what shopgirl wouldn’t have? But 
you see, I married Jim because 1 . . 1 thought that he was you. I 

thought that he was Taggart Transcontinental. Now I know that 
lie’s’' — she hesitated, then went on firmly, as if not to spare herself 
anything — “he’s some sort ot vicious moocher. though I can’t under- 
stand of what kmd or why. When I spoke to you at my wedding, I 
thought that I was defending greatness and attacking its enemy . . . 
hut it was in reverse ... it was in such horrible, unbelievable 
reverse! ... So 1 wanted to tell you that 1 know the truth . . . not 
so much for your sake, I had no right to presume that you’d care, 
but . . . but for the sake of the things 1 loved.” 

Dagny said slowly, “Of course 1 forgive it.” 

“Thank you,” she whispered, and turned to go. 

“Sit down.” 

She shook her head. “That . . . that was all. Miss Taggart.” 

Dagny allowed herself the first touch of a smile, no more than in 
the look her eyes, as she said, “Cherryl, my name is Dagny.” 

Cherryl’s answer was no mote than a taint, tremulous crease of 
her mouth, as if together, they had completed a single smile. “1 . . . 

1 didn’t know whether T should--” 

“We’re sisters, aren’t we?” 

“No! Not through Jim!” li was an involuntary cry. 

“No, through our own choice. Sit down, Cherryl.” The girl obeyed, 
struggling not to show the eagerness of her acceptance, not to grasp 
for support, not to break. “You’ve had a terrible time, haven’t you?” 

“Yes . . . but that doesn’t matter . . that’s my own problem . . 

and my own fault.” 

“1 don’t think it was your own fault.” 

Cherryl did not answer, then said suddenly, desperately. “Look . . . 
what I don’t want is charity ” 

“Jim must have told you— and it’s true -that l never engage m 
charity,” 

“Yes, he did . . . But what l mean is-—” 

“I know what you mean.” 

“But there's no reason why you should have to feel concern for 
me ... I didn't come here to complain and . . . and load another 
burden on your shoulders. . . . That I happen to suffer . doesn’t give 
me a claim on you.” 

“No, it doesn’t. But that you value all the things 1 value, does.” 

“You mean . , . if you want to talk to me, it’s not alms? Not just 
because you feel sorry tor me?” 

“1 feel terribly sorry for you, Cherryl, and I’d like to help you — 
not because you suffer, but because you haven’t deserved to suffer.” 

“You mean, you wouldn’t be kind to anything weak or whining 
or rotten about me? Only to whatever you see in me that’s good?” 

“Of course.” 

Cherryl did not move her head, but she looked as if it were lifted — 
as if some bracing current were relaxing her features into that rare 
look which combines pain and dignity. 

“It's not alms, Cherryl. Don’t be afraid to speak to me,” 

“It’s strange . , . You’re the first person 1 can talk to . . . and it 

813 



feels so easy . * . yet I ... I was afraid to speak to you. I wanted 
to ask your forgiveness long ago . . . ever since l learned the truth. 
I went as far as the door of your office, but 1 stopped and stood 
there in the hall and didn't have the courage to go in. ... I didn't 
intend to come here tonight. 1 went out only to . . to think some- 
thing over, and then, suddenly, I knew that 1 wanted to see you, that 
in the whole of the city this was the only place for me to go and 
the only thing still left for me to do." 

“l’m glad you did. 7 ' 

“You know. Miss Tag — Dagny," she said softly, in wonder, 
“you’re not as I expected you to be at all. . . They, Jim and his 
friends, they said you were hard and cold and unfeeling." 

“But it’s true. Cherryl. 1 am, m the sense they mean— -only have 
they ever told you in just what sense they mean it 9 " 

“No. They never do. They only sneer at me when 1 ask them what 
they mean by anything . . about anything. What did they mean 
about you 9 " 

“Whenever anyone accuses some person of being ‘unicehng.’ he 
means that that person is just. He means that that person has no 
causeless emotions and will not grant him a feeling which he does 
not deserve. He means that ‘to feel' is to go against reason, against 
moral values, against reality. He means . . . What’s the matter?" she 
asked, seeing the abnormal intensity of the gill’s face. 

“It's . . it's something I’ve tried so hard to understand . . , for 
such a long time. . . 

“Well, observe that you never hear that accusation in defense ol 
innocence, but always in defense of guilt. You never hear it said by 
a good person about those who fail to do him justice. But you always 
hear it said by a rotter about those who treat him as a rotter, those 
who don’t feel any sympathy for the evil he’s committed or for the 
pain he suffers as a consequence. Well, it’s true— that is what I do 
not feel. But those who fee! it, feel nothing for any quality of human 
greatness, for any person or action that deserves admiration, ap- 
proval, esteem. These are the things / feel. You'll find that it's one 
or the other. Those who grant sympathy to guilt, grant none to inno- 
cence. Ask yourself which, ol the two, are the unfeeling persons 
And then you’ll see what motive is the opposite of charity." 

“What?" she whispered. 

“Justice, Cherryl." 

Cherryl shuddered suddenly and dropped her head, “Oh God!" 
she moaned “If you knew what hell Jim has been giving me because 
1 believed just what you said!" She raised her face in the sweep of 
another shudder, as if the things she had tried to control had broken 
through; the look in her eyes was terror. “Dagny," she whispered, 
“Dagny, I'm afraid of them , . . of Jifn and all the others . . . not 
afraid of something they’ll do . . . if it.; were that, I could escape . . . 
but afraid, as if there’s no way out » . . afraid of what they are 
and . . . and that they exist," ; 

Dagny came forward swiftly to sit on the arm of her chair and 
seize her shoulder in a steadying gt£sp. “Quiet, kid," she said. 
“You’re wrong. You must never feel afraid of people in that way 

814 



You must never think that their existence is a reflection on yours — 
yet that’s what you’re thinking.” 

“Yes ... Yes, I feel that there’s no chance for me to exist, if they 
do . , . no chance, no room, no world I can cope with. ... I don’t 
want to teel it, 1 keep pushing it hack, but it's coming closer and I 
know 1 have no place to run. ... 1 can t explain what it feels like, 

1 can’t catch hold of it — and that’s part of the terror, that you can 7 
catch hold of anything — it’s as if the whole world were suddenly 
destroyed, but not by an explosion— an explosion is something hard 
and solid— but destroyed by ... by some horrible kind of 
softening ... as if nothing were solid, nothing held any shape at all, 
and you could poke your finger through stone wall and the stone 
would give, like jelly, and mountains would slither, and buildings 
would switch their shapes like clouds— and that would be the end 
ot the world, not lire and brimstone, but goo ” 

“Cherrvl . . . Cherryl, you poor kid. there have been centuries of 
philosophers plotting to turn the world into just that— to destroy 
people’s minds by making them believe that that’s what they're 
seeing. But you don’t have to accept it. You don’t have to see 
through the eyes of others, hold on to yours, stand on your own 
judgment, you know that what is, is — say it aloud, like the holiest of 
praycis, and don’t let anyone tell you otherwise ” 

‘'But . . . but nothing is, any more. Jim and his friends — they’re 
not l don't know what I’m looking at, when I’m among them. 1 
don’t know what I’m hearing when they speak . . . it's not real, any 
of it. it’s some ghastly sort ot act that they're all going through . . . 
and I don’t know what they're after. . . Dagnv* We’ve always been 
told that human beings have such a great power of knowledge, so 
much greater than animals, but I — I feel blinder than any animal 
light now', blinder and more helpless. An animal knows who are its 
friends and who are its enemies, and when to defend itself. It doesn’t 
expect a triend to step on it or to cut its throat. It doesn’t expect to 
he told that love is blind, that plunder is achievement, that gangsters 
aie statesmen and that it's great to break the spine of Hank Rear- 
den!— oh God, what am I saving?” 

“1 know what you’re saying,” 

i mean, how am I to deal with people? I mean, if nothing hold 
firm for the length of one hour— we couldn’t go on, could we? Well, 

1 knowr that tilings are solid — but people 0 Dagny! They’re nothing 
and anything, they’re not beings, they're only switches, just constant 
switches without any shape. But I have to live among them, flow 
am I to do it?” 

“Cherryl, what you’ve been struggling with is the greatest problem 
m history, the one that has caused all of human suffering. You’ve 
understood much more than most people, who suffer and die, never 
knowing what killed them. I’ll help you to understand. It’s a big 
subject and a hard battle— but first, above all, don’t be afraid.” 

The look on Cherry I's face was an odd. wistful longing, as if. seeing 
ftagny from a great distance, she were straining and failing to come 
doser. “J wish l could wish to fight,” she said softly, “but 1 don’t. I 
don’t even want to win any longer. There’s one change that 1 don’t 

815 



seem to have the strength to make. You see, I haci never expected 
anything like my marriage to Jim. Then when it happened, l thought 
that life was much more wonderful than 1 had expected. And now 
to get used to the idea that life and people are much more horrible 
than anything I had imagined and that my marriage was not a glori 
ous miracle, but some unspeakable kind of evil which I’m still atraid 
to learn fully — that is what l can’t force myself to take. I can’t get 
past it.” She glanced up suddenly. “Dagny, how did you do it? How 
did you manage to remain unmangled?” 

“By holding to just one rule.” 

“ Which?” 

“To place nothing — nothing — above the verdict of my own mind.” 

“You've taken some terrible beatings . . . maybe worse than I 
did . . . worse than any of us. . . . What held you through it?” 

“The knowledge that my life is the highest of values, too high to 
give up without a fight.” 

She saw a look ot astonishment, ot incredulous recognition on 
Chcrryi’s face, as if the girl were struggling to recapture some sensa- 
tion across a span of years, “Dagny”— her voice was a whisper — 
“that's . . . that’s what I felt when I was a child . . . that’s what I 
seem to remember most about myself . . . that kind of feeling . . . 
and I never lost it, it’s there, it's always been there, but as I grew 
up, I thought it was something that I must hide. ... I never had any 
name for it, but just now, when you said it, it struck me that that's 
what it was. . . Dagny, to feel that way about your own life — is 

that gooeft" 

“Cherry!, listen to me carefully: that feeling— with everything, 
which it requires and implies — is the highest, noblest and only good 
on earth.” 

“The reason 1 ask is because 1 ... I wouldn’t have dared to think 
that. Somehow, people always made me feel as if they thought it 
was a sin ... as if that were the thing in me which they resented 
and . . . and wanted to destioy.” 

“It’s true. Some people do want to destroy it. And when you learn 
to understand their motive, you’ll know the darkest, ugliest and only 
evil in the world, but you’ll be safely out of its reach.” 

Cherryl’s smile was like a feeble flicker struggling to retain its hold 
upon a few drops of fuel, to catch them, to flare up. “It’s the first 
time in months,” she whispered, “that I've felt as if ... as if there’s 
still a chance.” She saw Dagny’s eyes watching her with attentive 
concern, and she added, “I’ll be all right . . Let me get used to 

it — to you, to all the things you said. 1 think I'll come to believe 
it ... to believe that it’s real . . . and that Jim doesn’t matter.” She 
rose to her feet, as if trying to retaiif the moment of assurance. 

Prompted by a sudden, causeless f certainty, Dagny said sharply. 
“Cherry!, I don’t want you to go hothe tonight.” 

“Oh no! I’m all right. I’m not afraid, that way. Not of going 
home.” 

“Didn’t something happen there tonight?” 

“No . . . not really . . . nothing worse than UvSual. It was just that 
I began to sec things a little more clearly, that was all. ... I’m all 

816 



right. I have to think, think harder than I ever did before . . . and 
then HI decide what I must do. Mav I— 1 11 She hesitated. 

“Yes?” 

“May I come back to talk to you again?” 

“Of course.” 

“Thank you, 1 ... I’m very grateful to you.” 

“Will you promise me that you’ll come back?” 

“1 promise.” 

Dagny saw her walking off down the hall toward the elevator, saw 
the slump of her shoulders, then the effort that lifted them, saw the 
slender figure that seemed to sway then marshal all of its strength 
lo remain erect. She looked like a plant with a broken stem, still 
held together by a single fiber, struggling lo heal the breach, which 
one more gust of wind would finish. 

* * 

Through the open door of his study. James Taggart had seen Cher- 
ry I cross the anteroom and walk out ot the apartment. He had 
slammed his door and slumped down on the davenport, with patches 
of spilled champagne still soaking the cloth of his trousers, as if his 
own discomfort were a revenge upon his wife and upon a universt: 
that would not provide him with the celebration he had wanted. 

\fter a while, he leaped to his feet, lore off his coal and threw it 
across the room. He reached lor a cigarette, but snapped it in half 
and flung it at a painting over the fireplace. 

He noticed a vase of Venetian glass-— a museum piece, centuries 
old, with an intricate system of blue and gold arteries twisting 
through its transparent body He seized it and Hung it at the wall; it 
hurst into a rain of glass as thin as a shattered light bulb. 

He had bought that vase for the satisfaction of thinking ot all 
the connoisseurs who could not afford it. Now he experienced the 
satisfaction ol a revenge upon the centuries which had prized it — 
and the satisfaction of thinking that there were millions of desperate 
I amities, any one of whom could have lived for a year on the price 
ol that vase. 

He kicked off his shoes, and fell back on Ihc davenport, letting 
his s'oeking feet dangle In mid-air. 

The sound ot the doorbell startled hinr it seemed to match his 
mood. It was the kind of brusque, demanding, impatient snap of 
^ound he would have produced it he were now- jabbing his finger at 
someone’s doorbell. 

He listened lo the butler's steps, promising himself the pleasure 
ot refusing admittance to whoever was seeking it. In a moment, he 
heard the knock at his door and the butler entered to announce, 
‘Mrs. Reardon to see you, sir.” 

“What? . . . Oh , . . Well! Have her come in!” 

He swung his feet down to the floor, but made no other conces- 
sion, and waited with half a smile of aleited curiosity, choosing not 
to rise until a moment after Lillian had entered the room. 

She wore a wine -colored dinner gown, an imitation of an Empire 
traveling suit, with a miniature double-breasted jacket gripping her 
high waistline over the long sweep of the skirt, and a small hat 

817 



clinging to one ear, with a feather sweeping down to curl under her 
chin. She entered with a brusque, unrhythmical motion, the train of 
her dress and the feather of her hat swirling, then flapping against 
her legs and throat, like pennants signaling nervousness. 

“Lillian, my dear, am I to be flattered, delighted or just plain 
flabbergasted?" 

“Oh. don’t make a fuss about it! I had to see you, and it had to 
be immediately, that's all.” 

The impatient tone, the peremptory movement with which she sat 
down were a confession of weakness: by the rules of their unwritten 
language, one did not assume a demanding manner unless one were 
seeking a favor and had no value — no threat — to barter. 

“Why didn’t you stay at the Gun/ales reception?" she asked, her 
casual smile failing to hide the lone of irritation. “1 dropped in on 
them after dinner, just to catch hold of you-* -but they said you hadn’t 
been feeling well and had gone home." 

He crossed the room and picked up a cigarette, for the pleasure 
of padding in his stocking feet past the formal elegance her cos- 
tume. “I was bored," he answered. 

“I can't stand them." she said, with a little shudder, he glanced at 
her in astonishment: the words sounded involuntary and sincere. “I 
can't stand Senor Gon/ales and that whore he's got himself for a 
wife. It’s disgusting that they've become so fashionable, they and 
their parties. I don't feel like going anywhere any longer. It’s not 
the same style any more, not the same spiiit. 1 haven’t run into 
Balph Eubank for months, or Dr. Pritchett, or any of the boys. And 
all those new faces that look like butcher’s assistants! After all. our 
crowd were gentlemen." 

“Yeah," he said reflectively. “Yeah, there’s some lunny kind ot 
difference. It's like on the railroad, too: 1 could get along with Hern 
Weatherby, he was civili/ed, but Cuffy Meigs — that’s something else 
again, that’s . . He stopped abruptly 

“It’s perfectly preposterous." she said, in the tone of a challenge 
to the space at large. “They can’t get away with it." 

She did not explain “who" or “with what." He knew what she 
meant. Through a moment of silence, they* looked as if they were 
clinging to each other for reassurance. 

In the next moment, he was thinking with pleasurable amusement 
that Lillian was beginning to show her age. The deep burgundy color 
of her gown was unbecoming, it seemed to draw a purplish tinge out ot 
her skin, a tinge that gathered, like twilight, in the small gullies of 
her face, softening her flesh to a texture of tired slackness, changing hci 
look of bright mockery into a look of static malice. 

He saw her studying him, smiling and spying crisply, with the smile 
as license for insult, “You are unwell, Aren’t you, Jim? You look 
like a disorganized stableboy." ; 

He chuckled. "I can afford it." 

“I know it, darling. You’re one of the most powerful men in New 
York City." She added, “It’s a good joke on New York City." 

“It is.” 

“I concede that you’re in a position to do anything. That’s why 1 

818 



had to see you.” She added a small, gruntlike sound of amusement, 
to dilute her statement’s frankness, 

“Good,” he said, his voice comfortable and noncommittal. 

“I had to come here, because 1 thought it best, in this particular 
matter, not to be seen together in public.” 

“That is always wise.” 

“J seem to remember having been useful to you in the past.” 

“In the past — yes.” 

“1 am sure that 1 can count on you.” 

“Of course — only isn’t that an old-fashioned, unphilosophical re- 
mark? How can we ever be sure of anything?” 

“Jim,” she snapped suddenly, “you've got to help me!” 

“My dear. Pm at your disposal, Pd do anything to help you,” he 
answered, the rules of their language requiring that any open state- 
ment be answered by a blatant lie. Lillian was slipping, he thought — 
and he experienced the pleasure of dealing with an inadequate 
adversary. 

She was neglecting, he noted, even the perfection of her particular 
trademark: her grooming A few strands were escaping from the 
drilled waves of her hair — hei nails, matching her gown, were the deep 
shade of coagulated blood, which made it easy to norice the chipped 
polish at their tips — and against the broad, smooth, creamy expanse 
of her skin in the low, square cut of her gown, he observed the tiny 
glitter of a safety pin holding the stiap of her slip 

“You’ve got to prevent it!” she said, in the belligerent tone of a 
plea disguised as a command. “You've got to slop it!” 

“Really? What?” 

“My divorce.” 

“Oh . !” His features dropped into sudden earnestness. 

“You know that he's going to divorce me. don’t you?” 

“I’ve heard some rumors about it.” 

“It's set for next month. And when 1 say \et. that's just what l 
mean. Oh, it’s cost him plenty- but he's bought the judge, the clerks, 
the bailiffs, their backers, their backers' backers, a few legislators, 
half a do/en administrators- he’s bought the whole legal process, 
like a private thoroughfare, and there’s no single crossroad left for 
me to squeeze through to slop it!” 

“I see.” 

“You know, of course, what made him start divorce proceedings?” 

“I can guess.” 

“And l did it as a favor to you*" Her voice was growing anxiously 
shrill. “I told you about your sister in order to let you get that Gift 
C ertificate for your friends, which—” 

“1 swear f don’t know who let it out!” he cried hastily. “Only a 
very few at the lop knew that you'd been our informer, and I'm sure 
nobody would dare mention--” 

“Oh, l*m sure nobody did. He’d have the brains to guess it, 
wouldn’t he?” 

“Yes, f suppose so. Well, then you knew that you were taking 
a chance.” 


m 



U I didn’t think he’d go that far. 1 didn’t think he’d ever divorce 
me. I didn’t — ” 

He chuckled suddenly, with a glance of astonishing perceptiveness. 
"You didn’t think that guilt is a rope that wears thin, did you, 
Lillian?” 

She looked at him. startled, then answered stonily. “I don’t think 
it does.” 

"It does, my dear— -for men such as your husband.” 

"I don’t want him to divorce me!” It was a sudden scream. "1 
don’t want to let him go free! 1 won’t permit it! I won’t let the whole 
of my life be a total failure!” She stopped abruptly, as if she had 
admitted too much. 

He was chuckling softly, nodding his head with a slow movement 
that had an air of intelligence, almost of dignity, by signifying a 
complete understanding. 

"1 mean . . . after all, he’s my husband,” she said defensively 

“Yes, Lillian, yes, 1 know.” 

"Do you know what he's planning? He’s going to get the decree 
and he’s going to cut me off without a penny— no settlement, no 
alimony, nothing! He's going to have the last word. Don't you see? 
If he gets away with it, then then the Gift Ceitilicate was no 
victory fot me at all!” 

“Yes, my dear, 1 see.” 

'And besides . . . It’s preposterous that l should have to think ol 
it. but what am 1 going to live on 7 The little money I had of my 
own is worth nothing nowadays. It’s mainly stock in lactories of my 
father’s time, that have closed long ago. What am I going to do?” 

“But, Lillian,” he said softly, “I thought you had no concern for 
money or for any material rewards.” 

“You don't understand! I'm not talking about money — I’m talking 
about poverty! Real, stinking, hall-bedroom poverty! That’s out ot 
bounds for any civilized person! I -I too have to worry about lood 
and rent 7 ” 

He was watching her with a faint smile; for once, his soft, aging 
face seemed tightened into a look of wisdom, he was discovering the 
pleasure of full perception --in a reality which he could permit him- 
self to perceive. 

“Jim, you’ve got to help me! My lawyer is powerless, I've spent 
the little I had, on him and on his investigators, friends and fixers- - 
but all they could do for me was find out that they can do nothing. 
My lawyer gave me his final report this afternoon, fie told me bluntly 
that I haven't a chance I don't seem to know anyone who can help 
against a setup of this kind. I had counted on Bertram Scudder, 
but . . . well, you know what happened tk> Bertram. And that, too. 
was because I had tried to help you. You , pulled yourself out of that 
one, Jim, you're the only person who caii pull me out now. You've 
got your gopher-holc pipe line straight up to the top. You can reach 
the big boys. Slip a word to your triends to slip a word to their 
friends. One word from Wesley would do it. Have them order that 
divorce decree to be refused. Just have it refused.” 

He shook his head slowly, almost compassionately, like a tired 

m 



professional at an overzealous amateur. “It can’t be done, Lillian/’ 
he said firmly. “I’d like to do it — for the same reason as yours — and 
l think you know it. But whatever power I have is not enough in 
this case.” 

She was looking at him, her eyes dark with an odd, lifeless stillness; 
when she spoke, the motion of her lips was twisted by so evil a 
contempt that he did not dare identify it beyond knowing that it 
embraced them both; she said, “I know that you’d like to do it” 

He felt no desire to pretend; oddly, for the first time, for this one 
chance, truth seemed much more pleasurable— truth, for once, serv- 
ing his particular kind of enjoyment. “I think you know that it can’t 
he done,” he said. “Nobody does favors nowadays, if there’s nothing 
to gain in return. And the stakes are getting higher and higher. The 
gopher holes, as you called them, are so complex, so twisted and 
intertwisted that everybody has something on everybody else, and 
nobody dares move because he can t tell who’ll crack which way or 
when. So he’ll move only when he has to, when the stakes are life 
or death— and that’s practically the only kind of stakes we’re playing 
for now. Well, what’s your private life to any of those boys? That 
you’d like to hold your husband — what’s in it for them, one way or 
another? And my personal stock-in-trade — well, there’s nothing 1 
could offer them at the moment in exchange for trying to blast a 
whole court clique out of a highly profitable deal. Besides, right now, 
the top boys wouldn’t do it at any price. They have to be mighty 
careful of your husband — he’s the man who’s safe from them right 
now — ever since that radio broadcast of my sister's.” 

“ You asked me to force her to speak on that broadcast!” 

“1 know, Lillian. We lost, both of u is, that time And we lose, both 
ot us, now.” 

“Yes,” she said, with the same darkness of contempt in her eyes, 
“both of us.” 

It was the contempt that pleased him, it was the strange, heedless, 
unfamiliar pleasure of knowing that this woman saw him as he was, 
yet remained held by his presence, remained and leaned back in her 
chair, as if declaring her bondage. 

“You’re a wonderful person, Jim,” she said. It had the sound of 
damnation. Yet it was a tribute, and she meant it as such, and his 
pleasure came from the knowledge that they were in a realm where 
damnation was value. 

“You know,” he said suddenly, “you’re wrong about those butch- 
er’s assistants, like Gonzales. They have their uses. Have you ever 
liked Francisco d’Anconia?” 

“I can’t stand him.” 

“Well, do you know the real purpose of that cocktail-swilling occa- 
sion staged by Seftor Gonzales tonight? It was to celebrate the 
agreement to nationalize d’Anconia Copper in about a month.” 

She looked at him for a moment, the comer of her lips lifting 
slowly into a smile. “He was your friend, wasn’t he?” 

Her voice had a tone he had never earned before, the tone of an 
emotion which he had drawn from people only by fraud, but which 

821 



now, for the first time, was granted with full awareness to the real, 
the actual nature of his deed: a tone of admiration. 

Suddenly, he knew that this was the goal of his restless hours, this 
was the pleasure he had despaired of finding, this was the celebration 
he had wanted, 

'’Let's have a drink, Lil," he said. 

Pouring the liquor, he glanced at her across the room, as she lay 
stretched limply in her chair. 'Let him get his divorce," he said. “He 
won’t have the last word. 7 hey will. I he butcher's assistants. Scfior 
Gon/alcs and Cuffy Meigs." 

She did not answer. When he approached, she took the glass Irom 
him with a sloppily indifferent sweep of her hand. She drank, not in 
the maimer of a social gesture, but like a lonely drinker in a saloon— 
for the physical sake ol the liquor. 

He sat down on the arm of the davenport, improperly close to 
her, and sipped his drink, watching hei tact. After a while, he asked, 
"What does he think of me 9 " 

The question did not seem to astonish her. "He thinks you’re a 
fool." she answered. "He thinks life’s too short to notice your 
existence." 

"He’d notice it, il~ He stopped. 

" — if you bashed him ovei the head with a club" I'm not too sure. 
He’d merely blame himself for not having moved out of the dub's 
reach. Still, that would be your only chance.” 

She shifted her body, sliding lower in the armchair, stomach for- 
ward. as if relaxation were ugliness, as il she were granting him the 
kind of intimacy that required no poise and no respect. 

"That was the first thing I noticed about him,” she said, "when 1 
met him for the first time that he was not afraid He looked as it 
he fell certain that there was nothing any of us could do to him— 
so certain that he didn’t even know the issue or the nature of what 
he felt." 

"How long since you saw him last?” 

"Three months. 1 haven’t seen him since . . since the Gift 
Certificate ..." 

"1 saw him at an industrial meeting two weeks ago. He still looks 
that way — only more so. iVmv, he looks as if he knows it." He added, 
"You have failed, Lillian." 

She did not answer. She pushed her hat off with the back of her 
hand: it rolled down to the carpet, its feather curling like a question 
mark. "1 remember the first time 1 saw his mills," she said. "/ hs 
mills! You can’t imagine what he fell about them. You wouldn't 
know the kind of intellectual arrogance it takes to feel as if anything 
pertaining to him, anything he touched. Were made sacred by the 
touch. His mills, his Metal, his money, his bed, his wife!" She glanced 
up at him, a small flicker piercing the lethargic emptiness of her 
eyes. "He never noticed your existence. Hp did notice mine. Pm still 
Mrs, Rearden — at least for another mont^." 

"Yes . , ." he said, looking down at her with a sudden, new 
interest. 

"Mrs. Rearden!" she chuckled. "You wouldn’t know what that 

822 



meant to him. No feudal lord ever felt or demanded such reverence 
for the title of his wife — or held it as such a symbol of honor. Of 
his unbending, untouchable, inviolate, stainless honor!” She waved 
her hand in a vague motion, indicating the length of her sprawled 
body. ‘‘Caesar’s wife!” she chuckled. “Do you remember what she 
was supposed to be? No, you wouldn’t. She was supposed to be 
above reproach.”* 

He was staring down at her with the heavy, blind stare of impotent 
hatred- a haired of which she was the sudden symbol, not the object. 
*‘He didn’t like it when his Metal was thrown into common, public 
use, for any chance passer-by to make . . . did he?” 

“No, he didn’t.” 

His words were blurring a little, as if weighted with drops of the 
liquor he had swallowed: “Don’t tell me that you helped us to get 
that Gift Certificate as a favor to me and that you gained nothing. . . . 

1 know why you did it.” 

“You knew it at the time.” 

“Sure. That’s why 1 like you, Lillian.” 

His eyes kept coming back to the low cut of her gown. It was not 
the smooth skin that attracted his glance, not the exposed rise of 
her breasts, but the fraud of the safety pin beyond the edge. 

“I'd like to see him beaten,” he said. “I’d like to hear him scream 
with pain, just once.” 

“You won’t, Jimmy ” 

“Why does he think he's better than the rest of us — he and that 
sister of mine 9 ” 

She chuckled. 

He rose as if she had slapped him. He went to the bar and poured 
himself another drink, not offering to refill her glass. 

She was speaking into space, staring past him. “He did notice my 
existence -even though 1 can’t lay railtoad tracks for him and erect 
bridges to the glory of his Metal. 1 can’t build his mills — but I can 
destroy them. 1 can't produce his Metal— but 1 can take it away from 
him. I can’t bring men down to their knees in admiration — but I can 
bring them down to their knees.” 

' Shut up!” he screamed in terror, as if she were coming too close 
to that fogbound alley which had to remain unseen. 

She glanced up at his face. “You're such a coward, Jim.” 

“Why don't you get drunk?” he snapped, sticking his unfinished 
drink at her mouth, as if he wanted to strike her. 

Her fingers half-closed limply about the glass, and she drank, spill- 
ing the liquor down her chin, her breast and her gown. 

“Oh hell, Lillian, you’re a mess!” he said and, not troubling lo 
reach for his handkerchief, he stretched out his hand to wipe the 
liquor with the fiat of his palm. His fingers slipped under the gown’s 
neckline, dosing over her breast, his breath catching in a sudden 
gulp, like a hiccough. His eyelids were drawing closed, but he caught 
a glimpse of her face leaning back unresistingly, her mouth swollen 
with revulsion. When he reached for her mouth, her arms embraced 
him obediently and her mouth responded, but the response was just 
a pressure, not a kiss. 


* 823 



He raised his head to glance at her face. Her teeth were bared in 
a smile, but she was staring past him, as if mocking some invisible 
presence, her smile lifeless, yet loud with malice, like the grin of a 
fleshless skull. 

He jerked her closer, to stifle the sight of his own shudder. His 
hands were going through the automatic motions of intimacy — and 
she complied, but in a manner that made him feel as if the beats of 
her arteries under his touch were snickering giggles. They were both 
performing an expected routine, a routine invented by someone and 
imposed upon them, performing it in mockery, in hatred, in defiling 
parody on its inventors. 

He felt a sightless, heedless fury, part-horror, part-pleasure — the 
horror of committing an act he would never dare contess to anyone— 
the pleasure of committing it in blasphemous defiance of those to 
whom he would not dare confess it. He was himself! — the only con- 
scious part of his rage seemed to be screaming to hirn — he was, at 
last, himself! 

They did not speak. They knew each other’s motive. Only two 
words were pronounced between them. “Mrs. Rearden ,” he said. 

They did not look at each other when he pushed her into his 
bedroom and onto his bed. falling against her body, the look of 
partners in guilt, the furtive, smutty look ol children defiling some- 
one’s dean fence by chalking sneaky scratches intended as symbols 
of obscenity 

Afterward, it did not disappoint him that what he had possessed 
was an inanimate body without resistance or response. It was not a 
woman that he had wanted to possess. It was not an act in celebra- 
tion of life that he had wanted to perform —but an act in celebration 
of the triumph of impotence 

* * 

Cherry! unlocked the door and slipped in quietly, almost surrepti- 
tiously, as if hoping not to be seen or to see the place which was 
her home. The sense of Dagny’s presence- -of Dagny's world — had 
supported her on her way back, but when she entered her own apart- 
ment the walls seemed to swallow her again into the suffocation ol 
a trap. 

The apartment was silent; a wedge of light cut across the anteroom 
from a door left half-open. She dragged herself mechanically in the 
direction of her room. Then she stopped. 

The open band of light was the door of Jim's study, and on the 
illuminated strip of its carpet she saw a woman’s hat with a feather 
stirring faintly in a draft. 

She took a step forward. The room jwas empty, she saw two 
glasses, one on a table, the other on the ffoor, and a woman’s purse 
lying on the seat of an armchair. She st^nxi, in unreacting stupor, 
until she heard the muffled drawl of two Voices behind the door of 
Jim’s bedroom; she could not distinguish (he words, only the quality 
of the sounds; Jim’s voice had a tone of irritation, the woman’s— 
of contempt. 

Then she found herself in her own room, fumbling frantically to 
lock her door. She had been flung here by the blind panic of escape, 

824 * 



as if it were she who had to hide, she who had to run from the ugliness 
of being seen in the act of seeing them— a panic made of revulsion* 
of pity, of embarrassment, of that mental chastity which recoils from 
confronting a man with the unanswerable proof of his evil. 

She stood in the middle of her room, unable to grasp what action 
was now possible to her. Then her knees gave way, folding gently, 
she found herself sitting on the floor and she stayed there, staring 
al the carpet, shaking. 

It was neither anger nor jealousy nor indignation, but the blank 
horror ol dealing with the grotesquely senseless. It was the knowl- 
edge that neither their marriage nor his love for her nor his insistence 
on holding her nor his love lor that other woman nor this gratuitous 
adultery had any meaning whatever, that there was no shred of sense 
in any of it and no use to grope for explanations. She had always 
thought of evil as purposeful, as a means to some end: what she was 
seeing now was evil for evil's sake. 

She did not know how long she had sat there, when she heard 
their steps and voices, then the sound of the front door dosing. She 
got up, with no purpose in mind, but impelled by some instinct from 
the past, as if acting in a vacuum where honesty was not relevant 
any longer, but knowing no other way to act. 

She met Jim in the anteroom, f or a moment, they looked at each 
other as if neither could believe the other’s reality. 

“When did vou come back?'' he snapped “How long have you 
been home?" 

“I don't know . . 

He was looking at her face. “What’s the matter with you?" 

“Jim, I — ’’ She struggled, gave up and waved her hand toward his 
bedroom. “Jim, I know." 

“What do you know 0 " 

“You were there ... with a woman." 

His first action was to push her into his study and slam the door, 
as if to hide them both, he could no longer sa> from whom. An 
unadmitted rage was boiling m hts mind, struggling between escape 
and explosion, and it blew up into the sensation that this negligible 
little wife of his was depriving him of his triumph, that he would not 
surrender to her his new enjoyment 

“Sure!" he screamed. “So what? What are you going to do 
about it?" 

She stared at him blankly. 

“Sure! I was there with a woman! That's what I did, because that's 
what I felt like doing! Do you think you're going to scare me with 
your gasps, your stares, your whimpering virtue?" He snapped his 
fingers. "That for your opinion! I don't give a hoot in hell about 
your opinion! Take it and like it!" It was her white, defenseless face 
that drove him on, lashing him into a stale of pleasure, the pleasure 
of feeling as if his words were blows disfiguring a human face. “Do 
you think you're going to make me hide? I'm sick of having to put 
on an act for your righteous satisfaction! Who the hell are you* you 
cheap little nobody? I'll do as I please, and you’ll keep your mouth 
shut and go through the right tricks in public, like everybody else, 

825 



and stop demanding that l act in my own home! — nobody is virtuous 
in his own home, the show is only for company! — but if you expect 
me to mean it — to mean it, you damn little fool! — you’d better grow 
up in a hurry!” 

ft was not her face that he was seeing, it was the face of the man 
at whom he wanted and would never be able to throw his deed of 
this night — but she had always stood as the worshipper, the defender, 
the agent of that man in his eyes, he had married her for it, so she 
could serve his purpose now, and he screamed, “Do you know who 
she was, the woman 1 laid? It was — ” 

“No!” she cried. “Jim! I don’t have to know!** 

“ft was Mrs. Rearden! Mrs. Hank Rearden!’’ 

She stepped back. He felt a brief Hash of terror-— because she was 
looking at him as if she were seeing that which had to remain unad- 
mitted to himself. She asked, m a dead voice that had the incongru- 
ous sound of common sense, “I suppose you will now want us to 
get divorced?” 

He burst out laughing “You goddamn tool! You still mean it! 
You still want it big and pure! I wouldn’t think of divorcing you— 
and don’t go imagining that I’ll let you divorce me! You think it’s 
as important as lhal #> Listen, you tool, there isn't a husband who 
doesn't sleep with other women and liieie isn't a wife who doesn't 
know it, but they don’t talk about it! I ll lay anybody I please, and 
you go and do the same, like all those bitches, and keep your 
mouth shut!” 

He saw the sudden, startling sight ot a look of hard, unclouded, 
unfeeling, almost inhuman intelligence in her eyes. “Jim, if 1 were 
the kind who did or would, you wouldn’t have mairted me.” 

“No. I wouldn't have.” 

“Why did you marry me?” 

He felt himself drawn as by a whirlpool, part m relief that the 
moment of danger was past, part in irresistible defiance of the same 
danger. “Because you were a cheap, helpless, preposterous little gut- 
tersnipe, who’d never have a chance at anything to equal me! Be- 
cause I thought you’d love me! I thought you'd know that you had 
to love me!” 

“As you are?” 

“Without daring to ask what I am! Without reasons! Without put- 
ting me on the spot always to live up to reason after reason after 
reason, like being on some goddamn dress parade to the end of 
my days!” 

“You loved me . . . because 1 was worthless?” 

“Well, what did you think you were?” 

“You loved me for being rotten?” 

“What else did you have to offer? But y6u didn’t have the humility 
to appreciate it. I wanted to be generofis, 1 wanted to give you 
security — what security is there in being hived for one’s virtues? The 
competition’s wide open, like a jungle mafkcl place, a better persort 
will always come along to beat you! But f^l was willing to love you 
for your flaws, for your faults and weaknesses, for your ignorance, 
your crudeness, your vulgarity — and that’s safe, you’d have nothing 

826 



to fear, nothing to hide, you could he yourself, your real, stinking, 
sinful, ugly self-— everybody’s self is a gutter — but you could hold my 
love, with nothing demanded of you!” 

“You wanted me to . . . accept your love ... as alms?” 

“Did you imagine that you could earn it? Did you imagine that 
you could deserve to marry me, you poor little tramp? I used to buy 
the likes of you lor the price of a meal! I wanted you to know, with 
every step you took, with every mouthful of caviar you swallowed, 
that you owed it all to me, thal you had nothing and were nothing 
and could never hope to equal, deserve or repay!” 

“1 . . . tried ... to deserve it." 

“Of what use would you be to me if you had?” 

“You didn’t want me to?” 

“Oh, you goddamn loop” 

“You didn’t want me to improve? You didn’t want me to rise? 
You thought me rotten and you wanted me to say rotten?” 

“O! what use would you be to me, if you earned it all, and I had 
to work to hold you. and you could trade elsewhere if you chose?” 

“You wanted it to be alms . . , for both of us and from both? 
You wanted us to be two beggars chained to each other?” 

“Yes, you goddamn evangelist’ Yes. you goddamned hero wor- 
shipper! Yes’” 

“You chose me because 1 was worthless?” 

“Yes!” 

“You’re lying. Jim ” 

His answer was only a startled glance of astonishment. 

“Those girls that you used to buy lor the price of a meal, they 
would have been glad to let their real selves become a gutter, they 
would have taken your alms and never tried to rise, but you would 
not marry one of them. You married me. because you knew that 1 
did not accept the gutter, inside or (ml, that I was struggling to rise 
and would go on struggling— -didn’t you?” 

“Yes’” he cried. 

I hen the headlight she had felt rushing upon her. hit its goal — and 
she screamed in the bright explosion of the impact — she screamed in 
physical terror, backing away from him. 

“What's the matter with >ou?” he cried, shaking, not daring to 
see in her eyes the thing she had seen. 

She moved her hands in groping gestures, half-waving it away, 
half-trying to grasp it; when she answeied, her words did not quite 
name it, but they were the only words she could find: “You . . . 
you’re a killer . . for the sake of killing . . 

It was too close to the unnamed; shaking with terror, he swung 
out blindly and struck her in the face. 

She fell against the side of an armchair, her head striking the floor, 
but she raised her head in a moment and looked up at him blankly, 
without astonishment, as if physical reality were merely taking the 
form she had expected. A single pear-shaped drop of blood went 
slithering slowly from the corner of her mouth. 

He stood motionless — and for a moment they looked at each 
other, as if neither dared to move. 

827 



She moved first. She sprang to her feet — and ran* She ran out of 
the room, out of the apartment — he heard her running down the hall, 
tearing open the iron door of the emergency stairway, not waiting to 
ring for the elevator. 

She ran down the stairs, opening doors on random landings, run- 
ning through the twisting hallways of the building, then down the 
stairs again, until she found herself in the lobby and ran to the street. 

After a while, she saw that she was walking down a littered side- 
walk in a dark neighborhood, with an electric bulb glaring in the 
cave of a subway entrance and a lighted billboard advertising soda 
crackers on the black roof of a laundry. She did not remember how 
she had come here. Her mind seemed to work in broken spurts, 
without connections. She knew only that she had to escape and that 
escape was impossible. 

She had to escape from Jim. she thought Where?— she asked, 
looking around her with a glance like a cry of prayer. She would 
have seized upon a job in a (ive-and ten, or in that laundry, or in 
any of the dismal shops she passed. But she would work, she thought, 
and the harder she worked, the more malevolence she would draw 
from the people around her, and she would not know when truth 
would be expected of her and when a he, but the stricter her honesty, 
the greater the fraud she would be asked to suffer at their hands. 
She had seen it before and had borne it, in the home of her family, 
in the shops of the slums, but she had thought that these were vicious 
exceptions, chance evils, to escape and forget. Now she knew that 
they were not exceptions, that theirs was the code accepted by the 
world, that it was a creed of living, known by all, but kept unnamed, 
leering at her from people s eves in that sly, guilty look she had 
never been able to understand — and at the root of the creed, hidden 
by silence, lying in wait for her in the cellars of the city and m the 
cellars of their souls, there was a thing with which one could not live. 

Why are you doing it to me?— she cried soundlessly to the dark 
ness around her. Because you’re good — some enormous laughter 
seemed to be answering from the roof tops and from the sewers 
Then i won't want to be good any longer — But you will — I don’t 
have to — You will— 1 can t bear it — You will. 

She shuddered and walked faster- -but ahead of her, in the foggy 
distance, she saw the calendar above the roofs of the city — it was 
long past midnight and the calendar said: August 6, but it seemed 
to her suddenly that she saw September 2 written above the city in 
letters of blood — and she thought: If she worked, if she struggled, it 
she rose, she would take a harder beating with each step of her climb, 
until, at the end, whatever she reached, it a copper company oi 
an unmortgaged cottage, she would see? it seized by Jim on some 
September 2 and she would see it vanish (o pay for the parties where 
Jim made his deals with his friends. j 

Then 1 won’t! — she screamed and whaled around and went run* 
ning back along the street — but it seemed to her that in the black 
sky, grinning at her from the steam of the laundry, there weaved an 
enormous figure that would hold no shapfe, but its grin remained the 
same on its changing faces, and its face was Jim’s and her childhood 

828 



preacher’s ami the woman social worker’s from the personnel depart- 
ment of the five-and-ten — and the grin seemed to say to her: People 
like you will always stay honest, people like you will always struggle 
to rise, people like you will always work, so we’re safe and you have 
no choice. 

She ran. When she looked around her once more, she was walking 
down a quiet street, past the glass doorways where lights were burn- 
ing in the carpeted lobbies of luxurious buildings. She noticed that 
she was limping, and saw that the heel of her pump was loose; she 
had broken it^omewhere in her blank span of running. 

From the sUddcn space of a broad intersection, she looked at the 
great skyscrapers in the distance. They were vanishing quietly into 
a veil of fog, with the faint breath of a glow behind them, with a 
few lights like a smile of farewell. Once, they had been a promise, 
and from the midst of the stagnant sloth around her she had looked 
to them for proof that another kind of men existed. Now she knew 
that they were tombstones, slender obelisks soaring in memory of the 
men who had been destroyed for having created them, they were 
the frozen shape of the silent cry that the reward of achievement 
was marly rdf >m. 

Somewhere in one of those vanishing towers, she thought, there 
was Dagnv— but Dagny was a lonely victim, fighting a losing battle, 
to be destroyed and to sink into fog like the others. 

There is no place to go, she thought and stumbled on — 1 can't 
stand still, nor move much longer— 1 can neither work nor rest™ ! 
can neither surrender nor fight- hut this . . t/us is what they want 

of me, this is where they want me— neither living nor deeid. neither 
thinking nor insane, but just a chunk of pulp that screams with fear, 
to be shaped by them as they please, the> who have no shape ot 
their own. 

She plunged into the darkness behind a corner, shrinking in dread 
lrom any human figure. No. she thought, they're not evil, not all 
people . . . they're only their own first victims, hut they all believe 
in Jim's creed, and I can't deal wiih them, once 1 know it . . . and 
it I spoke to them, they would try to grant me their good will, but 
I’d know what it is that they hold as the good and 1 would see death 
staring out ol their eyes. 

The sidewalk had shrunk to a broken strip, and splashes of garbage 
ran over from the cans at the stoops of crumbling houses. Beyond 
the dusty glow of a saloon, she saw a lighted sign “Young Women's 
Rest Club" above a locked dooi 

She knew the institutions of that kind and the women who ran 
them, the women who said that theirs was the job ot helping suffer- 
ers. It she went in- - she thought, stumbling past- -if she faced them 
and begged them for help, “What is your guilt?" they would ask 
her. “Drink? Dope? Pregnancy? Shoplifting?" She would answer. “I 
have no guilt, l am innocent, but Ym — " “Sorry. We have no concern 
for the pain of the innocent.” 

She ran. She stopped, regaining her eyesight, on the corner of a 
long, wide street. The buildings and pavements merged with the 
sky— and two lines of green lights hung in open space, going off into 

829 



an endless distance, as if stretching into other towns and oceans and 
foreign lands, to encircle the earth. The green glow had a look of 
serenity, like an inviting, unlimited path open to confident travel. 
Then the lights switched to red, dropping heavily lower, turning from 
sharp circles into foggy smears, into a warning of unlimited danger. 
She stood and watched a giant truck go by, its enormous wheels 
crushing one more layer of shiny polish into the flattened cobbles of 
the street. 

The lights went back to the green of safety-hut she stood trembling, 
unable to move. That’s how it works for the travel of one’s body, 
she thought, but what have they done to the traffic of the soul? They 
have set the signals in reverse— and the road is safe when the lights 
are the red of evil — but when the lights are the green of virtue, 
promising that yours is the right-of-way, you venture forth and arc 
ground by the wheels. All over the world, she thought — those in- 
verted lights go reaching into every land, they go on. encircling the 
earth. And the earth is littered with mangled cripples, who don’t 
know what has hit them or why, who crawl as best they can on their 
crushed limbs through their lightless days, with no answer save that 
pain is the core of existence — and the traffic cops of morality chortle 
and tell them that man, by his nature, is unable to walk. 

These were not words in her mind, these were the words which 
would have named, had she had the power to find them, what she 
knew only as a sudden fury that made her beat her fists in futile 
horror against the iron post of the traffic light beside her. against 
the hollow tube where the hoarse, rusty chuckle of a relentless mech- 
anism went grating on and on. 

She could not smash it with her fists, she could not batter one by 
one all the posts of the street stretching off beyond eyesight— as she 
could not smash that creed from the souls of the men she would 
encounter, one by one. She could not deal with people any longer, 
she could not take the paths they took - but what could she say to 
them, she who had no words to name the thing she knew and no 
voice that people would hear? What could she tell them? How could 
she reach them all? Where were the men who could have spoken? 

These were not words in hei mind, these were only the blows of 
her fists agaiast metal — then she saw herself suddenly battering her 
knuckles to blood agaiast an immovable post, and the sight made 
her shudder— and she stumbled away. She went on, seeing nothing 
around her, feeling trapped in a maze with no exit. 

No exit — her shreds of awareness wer<$ saying, beating it into the 
pavements in the sound of her steps —no exit ... no refuge . . . no 
signals ... no way to tell destruction fik>m safety, or enemy from 
friend. . . . Like that dog she had hea^.1 about, she thought . . . 
somebody’s dog in somebody's laboratory ... the dog who got his 
signals switched on him, and saw no w>y to tell satisfaction “from 
torture, saw food changed to beatings arid beatings to food, saw his 
eyes and ears deceiving him and his judgment futile and his con- 
sciousness impotent in a shifting, swimming, shapeless world — and 
gave up, refusing to eat at that price or to live in a world of that 
kind. . . . No! — was the only conscious word in her brain— no! — 

830 



no! — no!— not your way, not your world — even if this “no” is all 
that’s to be left of mine! 

It was in the darkest hour of the night, in an alley among wharfs 
and warehouses that the social worker saw her. The social worker 
was a woman whose gray face and gray coat blended with the walls 
of the district. She saw a young girl wearing a suit too smart and 
expensive for the neighborhood, with no hat, no purse, with a broken 
heel, disheveled hair and a bruise at the corner of her mouth, a girl 
staggering blindly, not knowing sidewalks from pavements. The 
street was only a narrow crack between the sheer, blank walls of 
storage structures, but a njy of light fell through a fog dank with the 
odor of rotting water; a stone parapet ended the street on the edge 
of a vast black hole merging river and sky. 

'Hie social worker approached her and asked severely. “Are you 
in trouble?” — and saw one wary eye, the other hidden by a lock of 
hair, and the face of a wild creature who has forgotten the sound of 
human voices, but listens as to a distant echo, with suspicion, yet 
almost with hope. 

The social worker seized her arm. “It’s a disgrace to come to such 
a state . . if you society girls had something to do besides indulging 
your desires and chasing pleasures, you wouldn't be wandering, 
drunk as a tramp, at this hour of the night ... if you stopped living 
for your own enjoyment, stopped thinking of yourself and found 
some higher—” 

Then the girl screamed — and the scream went beating against the 
blank walls of the street as in a chamber of loiture, an animal scream 
of terror. She tore her arm loose and sprang back, then screamed 
inarticulate sounds: 

“No! No! Not your kind of world!” 

Then she ran, ran by the sudden propulsion of a burst of power, 
the power of a creature running for its life, she ran straight down 
the street that ended at the river — and in a single streak of speed, 
with no break, no moment of doubt, with full consciousness of acting 
in self preservation, she kept running till the parapet barred her way 
and, not stopping, went over into space. 

Chapter V THEIR BROTHERS' KEEPERS 

On the morning of September 2, a copper wire broke in California, 
between two telephone poles by the track of the Pacific branch line 
of Taggart Transcontinental. 

A slow, thin rain had been falling since midnight, and there had 
been no sunrise, only a gray light seeping through a soggy sky — and 
the brilliant raindrops hanging on the telephone wires had been the 
only sparks glittering against the chalk of the clouds, the lead of the 
ocean and the steel of the oil derricks descending as lone bristles 
down a desolate hillside. The wires had been worn by more rains 
and years than they had been intended to carry; one of them had 
kept sagging, through the hours of that morning, under the fragile 
load of raindrops; then its one last drop had grown on the wire’s 

831 



curve and had hung like a crystal bead, gathering the weight of many 
seconds; the bead and the wire had given up together and, as sound- 
less as the fall of tears, the wire had broken and fallen with the fall 
of the bead. 

The men at the Division Headquarters of Taggart Transcontinental 
avoided looking at one another, when the break of the telephone 
line was discovered and reported. They made statements painfully 
miscalculated to seem to refer to the problem, yet to state nothing, 
none fooling the others. They knew that copper wire was a vanishing 
commodity, more precious than gold or honor; they knew that the 
division storekeeper had sold their stock of wire weeks ago, to un- 
known dealers who came by night and were not businessmen in 
the daytime, but only men who had friends in Sacramento and in 
Washington — just as the storekeeper, recently appointed to the divi- 
sion, had a friend in New York, named Cuffy Meigs, about whom 
one asked no questions. They knew that the man who would now 
assume the responsibility of ordering repairs and initiating the action 
which would lead to the discovery that the repairs could not be 
made, would incur retaliation fiom unknown enemies, that his fellow 
workers would become mysteriously silent and would not testify to 
help him, that he would prove nothing, and if he attempted to do 
hts job, it would not be his any longer. They did not know what was 
safe or dangerous these days, when the guilty were not punished, 
but the accusers were; and, like animals, they knew that immobility 
was the only protection when in doubt and in danger. They remained 
immobile; they spoke about the appropriate proccduic of sending 
reports to the appropriate authorities on the appropriate dates. 

A young roadmaster walked out of the room and out of the head- 
quarters building to the safely of a telephone booth in a drugstore 
and, at his own expense, ignoring the continent and the tiers ol 
appropriate executives between, he telephoned Dagny Taggart in 
New York, 

She received the call in her brother’s office, interrupting an emer- 
gency conference. The young roadmaster told her only that the tele- 
phone line was broken and that there was no wire to repair it; he said 
nothing else and he did not explain wh) he had tound it necessary to 
call her in person. She did not question him; she understood. “Thank 
you,” was ail that she answered. 

An emergency file in her office kept a iccord of all the crucial 
materials still on hand, on every division of Taggart Transcontinental. 
Like the file of a bankrupt, it kept registering losses, while the rare 
additions of new supplies seemed like the malicious chuckles of some 
tormentor throwing crumbs at a starving continent. She looked 
through the tile, closed it, sighed and s<|d. ‘Montana, Eddie. Phone 
the Montana Line to ship half their stocjt of wire to California. Mon- 
tana might be able to last without il-ifor another week.” And as 
Eddie Willers was about to protest, she? added, “Oil, Eddie. Califor- 
nia is one of the Iasi producers of oil lift in the country. We don’t 
dare lose the Pacific lane.” Then she went back to the conference 
in her brother's office. 

“Copper wire?” said James Taggart, with an odd glance that went 

832 



from her face to the city beyond the window. “In a very short while* 
wc won’t have any trouble about copper.” 

“Why?” she asked, but he did not answer. There was nothing 
special to see beyond the window, only the clear sky of a sunny day, 
the quiet light of early afternoon on the roofs of the city and, above 
them, the page of the calendar, saying: September 2. 

She did not know why he had insisted on holding this conference 
in his own office, why he had insisted on speaking to her alone, 
which he had always tried to avoid, or why he kept glancing at his 
wrist watch. 

“Things are, it seems to me, going wrong,” he said. “Something 
has to be done. There appears to exist a state of dislocation and 
confusion tending toward an unco-ordinated, unbalanced policy. 
What I mean is, there’s a tremendous national demand for transpor- 
tation, yet we're losing money. It seems to me — ” 

She sal looking at the ancestral map of Taggart Tianscontinental 
on the wall of his office, at the red arteries winding across a yellowed 
continent. There had been a time when the railroad was called the 
blood system of the nation, and the si ream of trains had been like 
a living circuit of blood, bringing growth and wealth to every patch 
of wilderness it touched. Now. it was still like a stream of blood, but 
like the one-way stream that runs from a wound, draining the last 
o! a body’s sustenance and life. One-way traffic — she thought indif- 
ferently— consumers’ traffic. 

There was Train Number 193. she thought. Six weeks ago. Train 
Number 193 had been sent with a load of steel, not to Faulkton, 
Nebraska, where the Spencer Machine fool Company, the best ma- 
chine tend concern still in existence, had been idle for two weeks, 
waiting for the shipment -but to Sand Creek, Illinois, where Confed- 
erated Machine had been wallowing in debt for over a year, produc- 
ing unreliable goods at unpredictable times. The steel had been 
allocated by a directive which explained that the Spencer Machine 
Tool Company was a rich concern, able to wait, while Confederated 
Machines was bankrupt and could not be allowed to collapse, being 
the sole source of livelihood of the community of Sand Creek, Illi- 
nois. Vhe Spencer Machine Tool Company had closed a month ago. 
Confederated Machines had closed two weeks later. 

The people of Sand Creek, Illinois, had been placed on national 
relief, but no food could be found for them in the empty granaries 
of the nation at the frantic call of the moment— so the seed grain of 
the farmers of Nebraska had been seized by order of the Unification 
Board— ^and Train Number 194 had carried the unplanted harvest 
and the future of the people of Nebraska to be consumed by the 
people of Illinois. “In this enlightened age,” Eugene Lawson had 
said in a radio broadcast; “we have come, at last, to realize that each 
one of us is his brother’s keeper.” 

“In a precarious period of emergency, like the present,” James 
Taggart was saying, while she looked at the map, “it is dangerous 
to find ourselves forced to miss pay days and accumulate wage ar- 
rears on some of our divisions, a temporary condition, of course, 
but — ” 


833 



She chuckled. “The Railroad Unification Plan isn’t working, is 
it, Jim?” 

“I beg your pardon?” 

“You’re to receive a big cut of the Atlantic Southern’s gross in- 
come, out of the common pool at the end of the year — only there 
won’t be any gross income left for the pool to seize, will there 0 ” 

“That’s not true! It’s just that the bankers are sabotaging the Plan. 
Those bastards — who used to give us loans in the old days, with no 
security at all except our own railroad -now refuse to let nte have 
a few measly hundred-thousands, on short term, just to take care of 
a few payrolls, when 1 have the entire plant of all the railroads of 
the country to offer them as security for my loan!” 

She chuckled. 

“We couldn’t help it!” he cried. “It’s not the fault of the Plan that 
some people refuse to carry their fair share of our burdens 1 ” 

“Jim, was this all you wanted to tell me? 11 it is. I'll go. I have 
work to do.” 

His eyes shot to his wrist watch. “No. no, that’s not all’ It’s most 
urgent that we discuss the situation and arrive at some decision, 
which — ” 

She listened blankly to the next stream ol generalities, wondering 
about his motive- He was marking time, vet he wasn't, not fully; she 
felt certain that he was holding her here for some specific purpose 
and, simultaneously, that he was holding her for the mere sake of 
her presence. 

It was some new trail in hurt, which she had begun to notice 
ever since Cherryl’s death, fie had come running to her, rushing, 
unannounced, into her apartment on the evening of flic day when 
Cherryl's body had been found and the story of her suicide had filled 
the newspapers, given by some social worker who had witnessed it, 
“an inexplicable suicide.” the newspapers had called it, unable to 
discover any motive, “ft wasn’t my fault!” he had screamed to her, 
as if she were the only judge whom he had to placate. ‘Tin not to 
blame for it! I’m not to blame!” He had been shaking with terror — 
yet she had caught a few glances thrown shrewdly at her face, which 
had seemed, inconceivably, to convey a touch of triumph. “Ciet out 
of here, Jim,” was all she had said to him. 

He had never spoken to her again about Cherryl, but he had 
started coming to her office more often than usual, he had stopped 
her in the halls for snatches of pointless discussions — and such mo- 
ments had grown into a sum that gav§ her an incomprehensible 
sensation: as if, while clinging to her for support and protection 
against some nameless terror, his arms Were sliding to embrace her 
and to plunge a knife into her back. 4 

“1 am eager to know your views,’ he was saying insistently, as she 
looked away, “it is most urgent that we f iscuss the situation and . . 
and you haven’t said anything.” She did dot turn. “It’s not as if there 
wete no money to be had out of the railroad business, but—” 

She glanced at him sharply: his eyes scurried away. 

“What 1 mean is, some constructive policy has to be devised,” he 

834 



droned on hastily. “Something has to be done ... by somebody. In 
times of emergency—’' 

She knew what thought he had scurried to avoid, what hint he 
had given her, yet did not want her to acknowledge or discuss. She 
knew that no train schedules could be maintained any longer, no 
promises kept, no contracts observed, that regular trains were can- 
celled at a moment’s notice and transformed into emergency specials 
sent by unexplained orders to unexpected destinations— and that the 
orders came from Cuffy Meigs, sole judge of emergencies and of the 
public weltare. She knew that factories were dosing, some with their 
machinery stilled for Jack of supplies that had not been received, 
others with their warehouses full of goods that could not be deliv- 
ered. She knew that the old industries— the giants who had built 
their power by a purposeful course projected over a span of time — 
were left to exist at the whim ol the moment, a moment they could 
not foresee or control. She knew that the best among them, those 
ol the longest range and most complex function, had long since 
gone - -and those still struggling to produce, struggling savagely to 
preserve the code of an age when production had been possible, were 
now inserting into their contracts a line shameful to a descendant of 
Nat Taggart: “Transportation permitting.” 

And yet there were men- -and she knew' it™ who were able to 
obtain transportation whenever they wished, as by a mystic secret, 
as by the grace of some power which one was not to question or 
explain. They were the men whose dealings with Cuffy Meigs were 
regarded by people as that unknowable of mystic creeds which smites 
the observer foi the sm of looking, so people kept their eyes closed, 
dreading, not ignorance, but knowledge. She knew that deals were 
made whereby those men sold a commodity known as “transporta- 
tion puli ’ " -a term which all understood, but none would dare define. 
She knew that these were the men ot the emergency specials, the 
men who could cancel her scheduled trains and send them to any 
random spot of the continent which they chose to strike with thcii 
voodoo stamp, the stamp superseding contract, property, justice, rea- 
son and lives, the stamp stating that “the public welfare” required 
the immediate salvation of that spot, lliese were the men who sent 
trains to the relief of the Smather Brothers and their grapefruit in 
Arizona- -to the relief of a factory in Florida engaged in the produc- 
tion of pin-ball machines — to the relief of a horse farm in Ken- 
tucky —to the relief of Orren Boyle's Associated Steel. 

These were the men who made deals with desperate industrialists 
to provide transportation for the goods stalled in their warehouses — 
or. failing to obtain the percentage demanded, made deals to pur- 
chase the goods, when the factory closed, at the bankruptcy sale, at 
ten cents on the dollar, and to speed the goods away m freight cars 
suddenly available, away to markets where dealers of the same kind 
were ready for the kill. There were the men who hovered over fac- 
tories, waiting for the last breath of a furnace, to pounce upon the 
equipment— and over desolate sidings, to pounce upon the freight 
cars of undelivered goods— these were a new biological species, the 
hit-and-run businessmen, who did not stay in any line of business 

835 



longer than the span of one deal, who had no payrolls 1 6 meet, no 
overhead to carry, no real estate to own, no equipment to build, 
whose only asset and sole investment consisted of an item known as 
“friendship.” These were the men whom official speeches described 
as “the progressive businessmen of our dynamic age,” but whom 
people called “the pull peddlers”— the species included many breeds, 
those of “transportation pull,” and of “steel pull” and “oil pull” and 
“wage-raise pull” and “suspended sentence pull” — men who were 
dynamic, who kept darting all over the country while no one else 
could move, men who were active and mindless, active, not like 
animals, but like that which breeds, feeds and moves upon the 
stillness of a corpse. 

She knew that there was money to be had out of the railroad 
business and she knew who was now obtaining it. Cuffy Meigs was 
selling trains as he was selling the last of the railroad’s supplies, 
whenever he could rig a setup which would not let it be discovered 
or proved — selling rail to roads in Guatemala or to trolley companies 
in Canada, selling wire to manufacturers of juke boxes, selling cross- 
ties for fuel in resort hotels. 

Did it matter — she thought, looking at the map— which part of the 
corpse had been consumed by which type of maggot, by those who 
gorged themselves or by those who gave the food to other maggots? 
So long as living flesh was prey to be devoured, did it matter whose 
stomachs it had gone to fill? There was no way to tell which devasta- 
tion had been accomplished by the humanitarians and which by un 
disguised gangsters. There was no way to tell which acts of plunder 
had been prompted by the chanty-lust ol the Lawsons and which by 
the gluttony of Cuffy Meigs— no way to tell which communities had 
been immolated to feed another community one week closer to star- 
vation and which to provide yachts for the pull-peddlers. Did it mat- 
ter? Both were alike in fact as they were alike in spirit, both were 
in need and need was regarded as sole title to property, both were 
aetting in strictest accordance with the same code of morality. Both 
held the immolation of men as proper and both were achieving it. 
There wasn’t even any way to tell who were the cannibals and who 
the victims — the communities that accepted as their rightful due the 
confiscated clothing or fuel of a town to the east of them, found, 
next week, their granaries confiscated to feed a town to the west — 
men had achieved the ideal of the centuries, they were practicing it 
in unobstructed perfection, they were serving need as their highest 
ruler, need as first claim upon them, need as their standard of value, 
as the coin of their realm, as more sacred than right and life. Men 
had been pushed into a pit where, shouting that man is his brother’s 
keeper, each was devouring his neighbor i and was being devoured 
by his neighbor’s brother, each was proclaiming the righteousness of 
the unearned and wondering who was stripping the skin off his back, 
each was devouring himself, while screaming in terror that some 
unknowable evil was destroying the earth I 

“What complaint do they nriw have to make?” she heard Hugh 
Akston’s voice in her mind. “That the universe is irrational? Is it?” 

She sat looking at the map^ her glance dispassionately solemn, as 

836 



if no emotion save respect were permissible when observing the awe- 
some power of logic. She was seeing— in the chaos of a perishing 
continent — the precise, mathematical execution of all the ideas men 
had held. They had not wanted to know that this was what they 
wanted, they had not wanted to see that they had the power to wish, 
but not the power to fake — and they had achieved their wish to the 
letter, to the last bloodstained comma of it. 

What were they thinking now. the champions of need and the 
lechers of pity? — she wondered. What were they counting on? Those 
who had once simpered: “I don’t want to destroy the rich, I only 
want to seize a little of their surplus to help the poor, just a little , 
they’ll never miss it!” — then, later, had snapped: “The tycoons can 
stand being squeezed; they’ve amassed enough to last them for three 
generations” — then, later, had yelled: “Why should the people suffer 
while businessmen have reserves to last a year?” — now were scream 
ing: “Why should we starve while some people have reserves to last 
a week?” What were they counting on? — she wondered. 

“You must do something 1 ” cried Janies Taggart. 

She whirled to lace him. “/?” 

“It's your job, it’s your province, it’s your duty!” 

“What is?” 

“To act. To do.” 

“To do— what?” 

“How should I know? It's your special talent. You'te the doer.” 

She glanced at him: the statement was so oddly perceptive and so 
incongruously irrelevant. She rose to her feet. 

“Is tins all. Jim?" 

“No! No! 1 want a discussion’ * 

“Go ahead.” 

“Hut you haven't said anything!" 

“You haven’t, either.” 

“Hut . . What I mean is, there arc practical problems to solve, 

which . . For instance, what was that matter of our last allocation 

of new rail vanishing from the storehouse in Pittsburgh?*’ 

‘ C'uffy Meigs stole it and sold it." 

“Can you prove it?" he snapped defensively. 

“Have your friends left anv means, methods, rules or agencies 
of proof?” 

“Then don't talk about it, don't be theoretical, we've got to deal 
with facts! We've got to deal with facts as they are today ... I mean, 
we’ve got to be realistic and devise some practical means to protect 
our supplies under existing conditions, not under improvable assump- 
tions. which- 

She chuckled, there was the form of the lormless. she thought, 
there was the method of his consciousness; he wanted her to protect 
him from Cufty Meigs without acknowledging Meigs’ existence, to 
light it without admitting its reality, to defeat it without disturbing 
its game 

“What do you find so damn funny?" he snapped angrily, 

“You know it.” 

“I don't know what's the matter with you! 1 don't know what’s 

837 



happened to you ... in the last two months . . . ever since you came 
back. . . . You’ve never been so unco-operative !” 

“Why, Jim, I haven’t argued with you in the last two months.” 

“That’s what I mean!” He caught himself hastily, but not fast 
enough to miss her smile. “I mean, 1 wanted to have a conference, 
I wanted to know your view of the situation — ” 

“You know it.” 

“But you haven't said a word!” 

“I said everything I had to say, three years ago. 1 told you where 
your course would take you. It has.” 

“Now there you go again! What's the use of theorizing? We’re 
here, we’re not back three years ago. We’ve got to deal with the 
present, not the past. Maybe things would have been different, if we 
had followed your opinion, maybe, but the fact is that we didn't — 
and we’ve got to deal with facts. We’ve got to take reality as it is 
now , today!” 

“Well, take it.” 

“1 beg your pardon?” 

“Take your reality. I’ll merely take your orders.” 

“That’s unfair! I’m asking for your opinion — ” 

“You’re asking for reassurance, Jim You’re not going to get it.” 

“I beg your pardon?” 

“I’m not going to help you pretend — by arguing with you — that 
the reality you’re talking about is not what it is, that there’s still a 
way to make it work and to save your neck. There isn’t.” 

“Well . . .” There was no explosion, no angei — only the feebly 
uncertain voice of a man on the verge of abdication. “Well . . what 
would you want me to do?” 

“Give up.” He looked at her blankly. “Give up- all of you. you 
and your Washington friends and your looting planners and the 
whole of your cannibal philosophy. Give up and get out of the way 
and let those of us who can, start from scratch out of the ruins.” 

“No!” The explosion came, oddly, now; it was the scream of a 
man who would die rather than betray his idea, and it came from a 
man who had spent his life evading the existence of ideas, acting 
with the expediency of a criminal. She wondered whether she had 
ever understood the essence of criminals. She wondered about the 
nature of the loyalty to the idea of denying ideas. 

“No!” he cried, his voice lower, hoarser and more normal, sinking 
from the tone of a zealot to the lone of an overbearing executive. 
“That’s impossible! That’s out of the question!” 

“Who said so?” 

“Never mind! It’s so! Why do you always think of the impractical? 
Why don’t you accept reality as it is aijd do something about if* 
You’re the realist, you’re the doer, the mpver. the producer, the Nat 
Taggart, you’re the person who’s able; to achieve any go^l she 
chooses! You could save us now, you Could find a wav to make 
things work — if you wanted to!” 

She burst out laughing. 

There , she thought, was the ultimate goal of all that loose academic 
prattle which businessmen had ignored for years, the goal of all the 

m 



slipshod definitions, the sloppy generalities, the soupy abstractions, 
all claiming that obedience to objective reality is the same as the 
obedience to the State, that there is no difference between a law of 
nature and a bureaucrat's directive, that a hungry man is not free, 
that man must be released from the tyranny of food, shelter and 
clothing— all of it, for years, that the day might come when Nat 
Taggart, the realist, would be asked to consider the will of Cuffy 
Meigs as a fact of nature, irrevocable and absolute like steel, rails 
and gravitation, to accept the Meigs made world as an objective, 
unchangeable reality— then to continue producing abundance in that 
world. There was the goal of all those con men of library and class- 
100m, who sold their revelations as reason, their “■instincts” as sci- 
ence, their cravings as knowledge, the goal of all the savages of 
the non-objective, the non-absolute, the relative, the tentative, the 
probable — the savages who. seeing a farmer gather a harvest, can 
considei it only as a mystic phenomenon unbound by the law of 
causality and created by the farmers' omnipotent whim, who then 
proceed to sei/e the farmer, to chain him. to deprive him of tools, 
of seeds, of water, of soil, to push him out on a banco rock and to 
command: “Now grow a harvest and feed us!" 

No- -she thought, expecting Jim to ask it — -it would be useless to 
try to explain what she was laughing at. he would not be able to 
understand it. 

Hut he did not ask it. Instead, she saw him slumping and heard 
him sav “terrifyingly, because his words were so irrelevant, if he did 
not understand, and so monstrous, if he did, “Dagny. Pm your 
brother 

She drew herself up, her muscles growing rigid, as if she were 
about to face a killer's gun. 

“Dagnv”-- his voice was the soft, nasal, monotonous whine of a 
beggar -“I want to be president of a railroad. I want it. Why can’t 
1 have my wish as you always have yours 1 * Why shouldn’t I be given 
the fulfillment of my desires as you always fulfill any desire of your 
own 1 Why should you be happy while i suffer? Oh yes, the world 
is yours, you’re the one who has the brains to run it. Then why do 
you permit suffering in your world 9 You proclaim the pursuit of 
happiness, but you doom me to frustration. Don’t l have the right 
to demand any form oi happiness I choose? Isn’t that a debt which 
you owe me? Am l not your brother?” 

His glance was like a prowler’s flashlight searching her face for a 
shred of pity. It found nothing but a look of revulsion, 

"It’s your sin if 1 suffer! It s your moral failure! I’m your brother, 
therefore Pm your responsibility, but you’ve failed to supply my 
wants, therefore you’re guilty! All of mankind’s moral leaders have 
said so for centuries — who are you to say otherwise? You’re so proud 
of yourself, you think that you’re pure and good — but you can’t be 
good, so long as Pm wretched. My misery is the measure of your 
sin. My contentment is the measure of your virtue. I want this kind 
of world, today’s world, it gives me my share of authority, it allows 
me to feel important — make it work for me!— do something!— how 
do l know what?— it’s your problem and your duty! You have the 

839 



privilege of strength, but 1 — I have the right of weakness! That’s a 
moral absolute! Don’t you know it! Don’t you? Don’t you?” 

His glance was now like the hands of a man hanging over an abyss, 
groping frantically for the slightest fissure of doubt, but slipping on 
the clean, polished rock of her face. 

“You bastard,” she said evenly, without emotion, since the words 
were not addressed to anything human. 

It seemed to her that she saw him fall into the abyss— even though 
there was nothing to see in his face except the look of a con man 
whose trick has not worked. 

There was no reason to feel more revulsion than usual, she 
thought; he had merely uttered the things which were preached, 
heard and accepted everywhere; but this creed was usually ex- 
pounded in the third person, and Jim had had the open effrontery 
to expound it in the first. She wondered whether people accepted 
the doctrine of sacrifice provided its recipients did not identify the 
nature of their own claims and actions. 

She turned to leave. 

“No! No! Wait!” he cried, leaping to his feet, with a glance at his 
wrist watch. “It’s time now! There’s a particular news broadcast that 
1 want you to hear!” 

She slopped, held by curiosity. 

He pressed the switch ot the ladio, watching hei face openly, in- 
tently, almost insolently. His eyes had a look of fear and of oddly 
lecherous anticipation. 

“Ladies and gentlemen’*’ the voice of the radio speaker leaped 
forth abruptly; it had a tone of panic. “News of a shocking develop- 
ment has just reached us from Santiago, ( hiie!” 

She saw the jerk of Taggart's head and a sudden anxiety in his 
bewildered Irown, as if something about the words and voice were 
not what he had expected 

“A special session of the legislature of the People’s Slate of C hile 
had been called for ten o’clock this morning, to pass an act ol utmost 
importance to the people of Chile. Argentina and other South Amer- 
ican People’s States. In line with the enlightened policy of Schor 
Ramirez, the new Head of the Chilean State — who came to power 
on the moral slogan that man is his brother’s keeper- -the legislature 
was to nationalize the Chilean properties of d’Anconia Copper, thus 
opening the way for the People’s State of Argentina to nationalize 
the rest of the d’Anconia properties the world over. This, however, 
was known only to a very lew of the top-level leaders of both na 
tions. The measure had been kept secret in order to avoid debate 
and reactionary opposition. The set/une of the multibilhon dollai 
d’Anconia Copper was to come as a; munificent surprise to the 
country. 

“On the stroke of ten, in the exact foment when the chairman's 
gavel struck the rostrum, opening the session — almost as if the gav 
el's blow had set it off— the sound of a tremendous explosion rocked 
the hall, shattering the glass of its windows. It came from the harboi . 
a few streets away — and when the legislators rushed to the windows, 
they saw a long column of flame where once there had risen the 

840 



familiar silhouette of the ore docks of d’Aneonia Copper. The ore 
docks had been blown to bits. 

“The chairman averted panic and called the session to order. The 
act of nationalization was read to the assembly* to the sound of fire- 
alarm sirens and distant cries, it was a gray morning, dark with rain 
clouds, the explosion had broken an electric transmitter— so that the 
assembly voted on the measure by the light of candles, while the red 
glow of the fire kept sweeping over the great vaulted ceiling above 
their heads. 

“But more terrible a shock came later, when the legislators called 
a hasty recess to announce to the nation the good news that the 
people now owned d’Anconia Copper. While they were voting, word 
had come from the closest and farthest points ot the globe that there 
was no d’Anconia Copper left on earth. Ladies and gentlemen, not 
anywhere. In that same instant, on the stroke of ten, by an infernal 
marvel of synchronization, every property of d'Aneonia Copper on 
the face of the globe, from Chile to Siam to Spain to Pottsville, 
Montana, had been blown up and swept away. 

“The d’Aneonia workers everywhere had been handed their last 
pay checks, in cash, at nine a m , and by nine-thirty had been moved 
olf the premises. The ore docks, the smellers, the laboratories, the 
office buildings were demolished. Nothing was left of the d’Aneonia 
ore ships which had been in port -and only lifeboats carrying the 
crews were left of those ships which had been at sea. As to the 
d'Aneonia mines, some were buried under tons of blasted rock, while 
others were found not to be worth the price of blasting. An 
astounding number of these mines, as reports pouring in seem to 
indicate, had continued to be run, even though exhausted years ago. 

“Among the thousands of d'Aneonia employees, the police have 
louiul no one with any knowledge of how this monstrous plot had 
been conceived, organized and carried out. But the cream of the 
d'Aneonia staff are not here any longer. I he most efficient of the 
executives, mineralogists, engineers, superintendents have van- 
ished -all the men upon whom the People’s State had been counting 
to carry on the work and cushion the process ol readjustment. The 
most able — correction' the most selfish — <>i the men are gone. Rc- 
poits from the various banks indicate that there are no d'Aneonia 
accounts left anywhere; the money has been spent down to the last 
penny. 

“Ladies and gentlemen, the d'Aneonia fortune — the greatest for- 
tune on earth, the legendary fortune ot the centuries— has ceased to 
exist In place of the golden dawn ot a new age. the People's States 
oi Chile and Argentina arc left with a pile of lubble and hordes of 
unemployed on their hands. 

“No due has been found to the fate or the whereabouts of Seflor 
Francisco d’Anconia, He has vanished, leaving nothing behind him, 
not even a message of farewell.’' 

Thank you, my darling— thank you in the name of the last of us, 
even if you will not hear it and will not care to hear . , , It was not 
a sentence, but the silent emotion ot prayer in her mind, addressed 
to the laughing face of a boy she had known at sixteen. 

841 



Then she noticed that she was clinging to the radio* as if the faint 
electric beat within it still held a tie to the only living force on earth, 
which it had transmitted for a few brief moments and which now 
filled the room where all else was dead. 

As distant remnants of the explosion’s wreckage* she noticed a 
sound that came from Jim, part-moan, part-scream, part-growl — then 
the sight of Jim’s shoulders shaking over a telephone and his dis^ 
torted voice screaming, “But, Rodrigo, you said it was safe! Ro- 
drigo — oh God! — do you know how much I’d sunk into it?" — then 
the shriek of another phone on his desk, and his voice snarling into 
another receiver, his hand still clutching the first, “Shut your trap, 
Orren! What are you to do? What do 1 care, God damn you!" 

There were people rushing into the office, the telephones were 
screaming and, alternating between pleas and curses, Jun kept yelling 
into one receiver, “Get me Santiago! . Get Washington to get 
me Santiago!" 

Distantly, as on the margin of her mind, she could see what sort 
of game the men behind the shrieking phones had played and lost. 
They seemed far away, like tiny commas squirming on the white 
field under the lens of a microscope. She wondered how they could 
ever expect to be taken seriously when a Francisco d'Anconia was 
possible on earth. 

She saw the glare of the explosion in every face she met through 
the rest of the day — and in every face she passed in the darkness of 
the streets, that evening. If Francisco had wanted a worthy funeral 
pyre for d’Anconia Copper, she thought, he had succeeded. There 
it was, in the streets of New York C ity, the only city on earth still 
able to understand it — m the faces of people, in their whimpers, the 
whispers crackling tensely like small tongues of lire, the faces lighted 
by a look that was both solemn and frantic, the shadings of expres- 
sions appearing to sway and weave, as if cast by a distant flame, 
some frightened, some angry, most of them uneasy, uncertain, expec- 
tant, but all of them acknowledging a fact much beyond an industrial 
catastrophe, all of them knowing what it meant, though none would 
name its meaning, all of them carrying a touch of laughter, a laughter 
of amusement and defiance, the bitter laughter of perishing victims 
who feel that they are avenged. 

She saw it tn the face of Hank Rearden. when she met him for 
dinner that evening. As his tall, confident figure walked toward her- -the 
only figure that seemed at home in the costly setting of a distin- 
guished restaurant- -she saw the look of eagerness fighting the stern- 
ness of his features, the look of a young boy still open to the 
enchantment of the unexpected. He did not speak of this day’s event, 
but she knew that it was the only image in his mind. 

They had been meeting whenever he tame to the city, spending a 
brief, rare evening together— with their jpast still alive in their silent 
acknowledgment — with no future in theijr work and in their common 
struggle, but with the knowledge that thtfy were allies gaining support 
from the fact of each other’s existence. 

He did not want to mention today's, event, he did not want to 
speak of Francisco, but she noticed, as they sat at the table, that the 

842 



strain of a resisted smile kept pulling at the hollows of his cheeks. 
She knew whom he meant, when he said suddenly, his voice soft 
and low with the weight of admiration, “He did keep his oath, 
didn't he?" 

“His oathV * she asked, startled, thinking of the inscription on the 
temple of Atlantis. 

“He said to me, ‘l swear— by the woman I love — that l am your 
friend.’ He was." 

“He is.” 

He shook his head. “I have no right to think of him. 1 have no 
right to accept what he’s done as an act in my defense. And yet . . 

He stopped. 

“But it was. Hank. In defense of all of us — and of you, most 
of all" 

He looked away, out at the city. They sat at the side of the room, 
with a sheet of glass as an invisible protection against the sweep of 
space and streets sixty floors below. The city seemed abnormally 
distant: it lay flattened down to the pool of its lowest stones A few 
blocks away, its tower merging into darkness, the calendar hung at 
the level of their faces, not as a small, disturbing rectangle, but as 
an enormous screen, eerily clos<* and large, flooded by the dead, 
white glow of light projected through an empty film, empty but for 
the letters: September 2. 

“Rearden Steel is now working at capacity." he was saying indif- 
ferently. “They've htted the production quotas off my mills— for the 
next five minutes. 1 guess. 1 don't krtow how many of their own 
regulations they’ve suspended, 1 don’t think they know it, either, 
they don't bother keeping track of legality any longer, Fm sure ITn 
a lawbreaker on five or six counts, which nobody could prove or 
disprove -all 1 know is that the gangster of the moment told me to 
go lull steam ahead. 1 ' He shrugged “When another gangster kicks 
him out tomorrow. I'll probably be shut down, as penalty for illegal 
operation. But according to the plan of the present split-second, 
they've begged me to keep pouring my Metal, in any amount and 
by any means I choose." 

She noticed the occasional, surreptitious glances that people were 
throwing in their direction. She had noticed it before, ever since her 
broadcast, ever since the two ot them had begun to appear m public 
together, instead of the disgrace he had dreaded, there was an air 
of awed uncertainty in people’s manner— uncertainty of their own 
moral precepts, awe in the presence of two persons who dared to 
be certain of being right. People were looking at them with anxious 
curiosity, with envy, with respect, with the fear of offending an un- 
known, proudly rigorous standard, some almost with an air ot apol- 
ogy that seemed to say: “Please forgive us for being married.” There 
were some who had a look of angry malice, and a few who had a 
look of admiration. 

“Dagny," he asked suddenly, “do you suppose he’s in New York?" 

“No. I've called the Wayne-Falkland. They told me that the lease 
on his suite had expired a month ago and he did not renew it." 

“They’re looking lor him ail over the world," he said, smiling. 

843 



“They’ll never find him.” The smile vanished. “Neither will I.” His 
voice slipped back to the flat, gray tone of duty: “Well, the mills are 
working, but Tm not. I’m doing nothing but running around the 
countty like a scavenger, searching for illegal ways to purchase raw 
materials. Hiding, sneaking, lying — just to get a few tons of ore or 
coal or copper. They haven’t lifted their regulations off my raw mate- 
rials. They know that I'm pouring more Metal than the quotas they 
give me could produce. They don’t care.” He added, “They think 
I do.” 

“Tired, Hank?” 

“Bored to death.” 

There was a time, she thought, when his mind, his energy, his 
inexhaustible resourcefulness had been given to the task of a pro- 
ducer devising better ways to deal with nature; now, they were 
switched to the task of a criminal outwitting men. She wondered 
how long a man could endure a change of that kind. 

“It’s becoming almost impossible to get iron ore,” he said indifici- 
ently, then added, his voice suddenly alive, “Now it’s going to be 
completely impossible to get copper.” Ho was grinning. 

She wondered how long a man could continue to work against 
himself, to work when his deepest desire was not to succeed, but 
to fail. 

She understood the connection of his thoughts when he said. “I’ve 
never told you. but I’ve met Ragnar Danneskjold ” 

“He told me.” 

"What? Where did you ever — ” He stopped. “Ot eouise,” he said, 
his voice tense and low “He would be one ot them You would 
have met him. Dagny, what are they like, those men who . . . No. 
Don’t answer me.” In a moment he added, “So I've met one of 
their agents.” 

“You've met two of them.” 

His response was a span of total stillness. “Of course,” he said 
dully. “I knew it ... I just wouldn't admit to myself that 1 knew 
He was their recruiting agent, wasn't he?” 

“One ot their earliest and best.” 

He chuckled, it was a sound of bitterness and longing 4 That night 
when they got Ken Danagger ... I thought that they had not sent 
anyone after me. . . ” 

The effort by which he made his face grow rigid, was almost like 
the slow, resisted turn ot a key locking a sunlit room he could not 
permit himself to examine. After a while, he said impassively, 
‘'Dagny. that new rail we discussed last month- I don't think HI be 
able to deliver it. They haven’t lifted their regulations ofl my output, 
they’re still controlling my salts arid disposing of my Metal as they 
please. But the bookkeeping is in such a' snarl that I’m smuggling a 
few thousand tons into the black markqt every week. 1 think they 
know it. They’re pretending not to. TTic^ don’t want to antagonize 
me, right now. But, you see. I've been shipping every ton I could 
snatch, to some emergency customers of mine. Dagny, I was in Min- 
nesota last month. I've seen what’s going on there. The country will 
starve, not next year, but this winter, unless a few of us act and act 

844 



fast. There are no grain reserves left anywhere. With Nebraska gone, 
Oklahoma wrecked, North Dakota abandoned, Kansas barely sub- 
sisting — there isn’t going to be any wheal this winter, not for the 
city of New York nor for any Eastern city. Minnesota is our last 
granary. They’ve had two bad years in succession, but they have a 
bumper crop this fall — and they have to be able to harvest it. Have 
you had a chance to take a look at the condition of the farm-equip- 
ment industry? They’re not big enough, any of them, to keep a staff 
of efficient gangsters in Washington or to pay percentages to pull- 
peddlers. So they haven't been getting many allocations of materials. 
Two-thirds ol them have shut down and the rest are about to. And 
farms are perishing all over the country — for lack of tools. You 
should have seen those farmers in Minnesota. They’ve been spending 
more time fixing old tractors that can t be fixed than plowing their 
fields. I don’t know how they managed to survive till last spring. I 
don’t know how they managed to plant their wheat. But they did. 
They did.” There was a look of intensity on his face, as if he were 
contemplating a rare, forgotten sight: a vision of men — and she knew 
what motive was still holding him to his job. “Dagny, they had to 
have tools for their harvest. I’ve been selling all the Metal I could 
steal out of my own mills to the manufacturers of farm equipment. 
On credit. They’ve been sending the equipment to Minnesota as fast 
as they could put it out. Selling it in the same way— illegally and on 
credit But they will be paid, this fall, and so will I. Charity, hell! 
We’re helping producers — and what tenacious producers! — not lousy; 
mooching ‘consumers.’ We’re giving loans, not alms. We're support- 
ing ability , not need. I'll be damned it I'll stand by and let those men 
be dcstioved while the pull-peddlers grow rich!” 

He was looking at the image of a sight he had seen m Minnesota: 
the silhouette of an abandoned factory, with the light of the sunset 
streaming, unopposed, through the holes of its windows and the 
cracks of its roof, with the remnant of a sign: Ward Harvester 
Company. 

“Oh, 1 know,” he said, “We'll save them this winter, but the loot- 
ers will devour them next year. Still, we’ll save them this winter. . , . 
Well, that’s why I won’t be able to smuggle any rail for you. Not in 
the immediate future— and there's nothing left to us but the immedi- 
ate future. I don’t know what is the use of feeding a country, if it 
loses its railroads— but what is the use of railroads where there is 
no food? What is the use, anyway 0 ” 

“It’s all right. Hank. We’ll last with such rail as we have, for — ” 
She stopped. 

“For a month?” 

“For the winter — l hope.” 

Cutting across their silence, a shrill voice reached them from an- 
other table, and they turned to look at a man who had the jittery 
manner of a cornered gangster about to reach for his gun. “An act 
of anti-social devStructton,” he was snarling to a sullen companion, 
“at a time when there’s such a desperate shortage of copper! . . . 
We can’t permit it! We can’t permit it to be true!” 

Rearden turned abruptly to look off, at the city. 4 Td give anything 

845 



to know where he is,” he said, his voice low. “Just to know where 
he is, right now, at this moment.” 

“What would you do, if you knew it?” 

He dropped his hand in a gesture of futility. “I wouldn't approach 
him. The only homage I can stilj pay him is not to ciy for forgiveness 
where no forgiveness is possible.” 

They remained silent. They listened to the voices around them, to 
the splinters of panic trickling through the luxurious room. 

She had not been aware that the same presence seemed to be an 
invisible guest at every table, that the same subject kept breaking 
through the attempts at any other conversation. People sat in a man- 
ner, not quite of cringing, but as if they found the room too large 
and too exposed — a room of glass, blue velvet, aluminum and gentle 
lighting. They looked as il they had come to this room at the price 
of countless evasions, to let it help them pietcnd that theirs was still 
a civilized existence- -but an act of primeval violence had blasted 
the nature of (heir world into the open and they were no longer able 
not to see. 

“How could he? How could he?” a woman was demanding with 
petulant terror. “He had no ritfht to do it!” 

“ft was an accident,” said a young man with a staccato voice and 
an odor of public payroll. “It was a chain ol coincidences, as any 
statistical curve of probabilities can easily prove. It is unpatriotic to 
spread rumors exaggerating the power of the people’s enemies ” 

“Right and wrong ts all very well for academic eonveisations.” 
said a woman with a schoolroom voice and a barroom mouth, “but 
how can anybody take his own ideas seriously enough to destroy a 
fortune when people need it?” 

“I don’t understand it,” an old man was saying with quavering 
bitterness. “After centuries ot efforts to curb man’s innate brutality, 
after centuries of teaching, training and indoctrination with the gen- 
tle and the humane!” 

A woman’s bewildered voice rose uncertainly and trailed off: “I 
thought we were living in an age of brotherhood ...” 

“I’m scared,” a young girl war, repeating, “Pm scared . . oh, 1 
don't know! . . . Pm just scared . 

“He couldn't have done it!” . . . “He did!” . . . “But why?” . .“I 
refuse to believe it!” . . . “It’s not human!” . . . “But why 7 ” . . . 
“Just a worthless playboy!” . . . “But why?” 

The muffled scream of a woman across the room and some half 
grasped signal on the edge of Dagny's vision came simultaneously 
and made her whirl to look at the city. 

The calendar was run by a mechanism locked in a room behind 
the screen, unrolling the same film year after year projecting the 
dales in steady rotation, in changeless rhythm, never moving but on 
the stroke of midnight. The speed of D^gny's turn gave her time to 
see a phenomenon as unexpected as if a planet had reversed its orbit 
in the sky, she saw the words “September 2” moving upward and 
vanishing past the edge of the screen. 

Then, written across the enormous page, stopping time, as a last 

846 



message to the world and to the world's motor which was New York, 
she saw the lines of a sharp, intransigent handwriting: 

Brother, you asked for it! 

Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d’Anconia 

She did not know which shock was greater: the sight of the mes- 
sage or the sound of Rearden’s laughter— Rearden. standing on his 
feet, in full sight and hearing of the room behind him, laughing above 
their moans of panic, laughing in greeting, m salute, in acceptance 
of the gift he had tried to reject, in iclease, in triumph, in surrender. 

* * 

On the evening of September 7, a coppei wire broke in Montana, 
stopping the motor of a loading crane on a spur track of Taggart 
Transcontinental, at the rim of the Stanfoid Copper Mine. 

The mine had been working on three shifts, its days and nights 
blending into a single stretch of struggle to lose no minute, no drop 
of copper it would squeeze from the shelves of a mountain into the 
nation's industrial desert The crane broke down at the task ot load- 
ing a liain: it stopped abruptly and hung still against the evening sky, 
between a string ol empty cars and piles of suddenly immovable ore. 

The men of the railroad and of the mine stopped in dazed bewil- 
derment: they found that in all the complexity of their equipment, 
among the drills, ihe motors, the derricks, the delicate gauges, the 
ponderous floodlights beating down into the pits and ridges of a 
mountain — there was no wite to mend the crane. They stopped, like 
men on an ocean liner propelled by ten-thousand -horsepower gener- 
ators. but perishing for lack of a safety pin. 

The station agent, a young man with a swift body and a brusque 
voice, stripped the wiring from the station building and set the crane 
in motion again - and while the ore went clattering to till the cars, 
the light of candles came trembling through the dusk from the win- 
dows of the station. 

“Minnesota, Eddie,” said Dagny grimly, dosing the drawer of her 
special file. “Tell the Minnesota Division to ship hall their slock of 
wire to Montana.” “But good God. Dagny 1 — with the peak of the 
harvest rush approaching “They'll hold through it — 1 think. We 
don’t dare lose a single supplier of copper.” 

“But 1 have!” screamed James Taggart, when she reminded him 
once more. “1 have obtained foi you the top priority on copper wire, 
the first claim, the uppermost ration level, Fvc given you all the 
cards, certificates, documents and requisitions— what else do you 
warn'*” “The copper wire.” “!'ve done all 1 could! Nobody can 
blame me!” 

She did not argue. The afternoon newspaper was lying on bis 
desk— and she was staring at an item on the back page: An Emer- 
gency State Tax had been passed in California for the relief of the 
state’s unemployed, in the amount of fifty per cent of any local cor- 
poration’s gross income ahead of other taxes; the California oil com- 
panies had gone out of business. 

“Don’t worry, Mr. Rearden.” said an unctuous voice over a long- 
distance telephone line from Washington, “l just wanted to assure 
you that you will not have to worry.” “About what?’' asked Rearden, 

847 



baffled. “About that temporary bit of confusion in California. We’ll 
straighten it out in no time, it was an act of illegal insurrection, their 
state government had no right to impose local taxes detrimental to 
national taxes, we’ll negotiate an equitable arrangement immedi- 
ately — but in the meantime, if you have been disturbed by any unpa- 
triotic rumors about the California oil companies, I just wanted to 
tell you that Rcarden Steel has been placed in the top category of 
essential need, with first claim upon any oil available anywhere in 
the nation, very top category, Mr. Rcarden — so I just wanted you 
to know that you won’t have to worry about the problem of fuel 
this winter!" 

Rearden hung up the telephone receiver, with a frown of worry, 
not about the problem of fuel and the end of the California oil 
fields — disasters of this kind had become habitual — but about the 
fact that the Washington planners found it necessary to placate him. 
Tins was new; he wondered what it meant. Through the years of his 
struggle, he had learned that an apparently causeless antagonism was 
not hard to deal with, but an apparently causeless solicitude was an 
ugly danger. The same wonder struck him again, when, walking down 
an alley between the mill structures, he caught sight of a slouching 
figure whose posture combined an air of insolence with an air of 
expecting to be swatted: it was his brother Philip. 

Ever since he had moved to Philadelphia, Rearden had not visited 
his former home and had not heard a word from his family, whose 
bills he went on paying Then, inexplicably, twice in the last few 
weeks, he had caught Philip wandering through the mills for no ap- 
parent reason. He had been unable to tell whether Philip was sneak- 
ing to avoid him or waiting to catch his attention; it had looked like 
both. He had been unable to discover any clue to Philip's purpose, 
only some incomprehensible solicitude, of a kind Philip had never 
displayed before. 

The first time, in answer to his startled “What are >ou doing 
here?”— Philip had said vaguely. “Well, 1 know that you don’t like 
me to come to your office." “What do you want?” “Oh. nothing . . 
but . . . well. Mother is worried about you." “Mother can call me 
any time she wishes." Philip had not answered, but had proceeded 
to question him, in an unconvincingly casual manner, about his work, 
his health, his business; the questions had kept hitting oddly beside 
the point, not questions about business, but more about his. Rear- 
den’s, feelings toward business. Rearden had cut him short and 
waved him away, but had been left with the small, nagging sense of 
an incident that remained inexplicable. * 

The second time, Philip had said, as,, sole explanation, “We just 
want to know how you feel.” “Who’s v^e?" “Why . . Mother and 

I. These are difficult times and . . . well ^Mother wants to know how 
you feel about it all.” “Tell her that 1 don’t.” The words had seemed 
to hit Philip in some peculiar manner, almost as if this were the one 
answer he dreaded. “Get out of here,” Rearden had ordered wearily, 
“and the next time you want to see me, make an appointment and 
come to my office. But don’t come unless you have something to 

848 



say. This is not a place where one discusses feelings, mine or any- 
body else’s.” 

Philip had not called for an appointment — but now there he was 
again, slouching among the giant shapes of the furnaces, with an 
air of guilt and snobbishness together, as if he were both snooping 
and slumming. 

“But 1 do have something to say! 1 do!” he cried hastily, in answer 
to the angry frown on Rearden’s face. 

“Why didn't you come to my office?” 

“You don't want me in your office.” 

“I don’t want you here, either.” 

“Bui I’m only . . .I’m only trying to be considerate and not to 
take your time when you're so busy and . . you are very busy, 
aren't you?” 

“And?” 

“And . . well, 1 just wanted to catch you in a spare moment . . , 

to talk to you.” 

“About what?” 

“! . . . Well, 1 need a job.” 

He said it belligerently and drew back a little. Rearden stood 
looking at him blankly. 

“Henry, I want a job. I mean, here, at the mills. 1 want you to 
gi\e me something to do. 1 need a job. 1 need to earn my living. I'm 
tired of alms ” He was groppmg tor something to say, his voice both 
offended and pleading, as if the necessity to justify the plea were an 
unfair imposition upon him “1 want a livelihood of my own. I'm 
not asking you lor charity. I'm asking you to give me a chance!” 

“This is a factory. Philip, not a gambling joint.” 

“Uh?” 

“We don’t take chances or give them.” 

“I'm asking you to give me a job\" 

“Why should I?” 

“Because I need il r ” 

Rcai den pointed to the red spuits ot tlamc shooting from the black 
shape ot a furnace, shooting safely into space four hundred ket of 
steel-clay-and-steanvembodied thought above them. “1 needed that 
iurnace. Philip. It wasn't niv need that gave it to me.” 

Philip s face assumed a look of not having heard. “You’re not 
officially supposed to hire anybody, but that's just a technicality, if 
you’ll put me on, my fiiends will okay it without any trouble and — ” 
Something about Rcarden’s eyes made him stop abruptly, then ask 
m an angrily impatient voice, “Well, what’s the matter? What have 
I said that's wrong?” 

“What you haven't said.” 

“1 beg your pardon?” 

“What you're squirming to leave un mentioned.” 

“What?” 

“That you'd be of no use to me whatever.” 

“Is that what you — ” Philip started with automatic righteousness, 
hut stopped and did not finish. 

“Yes,” said Rearden, smiling, “//wix’s what 1 think of first.” 

849 



Philip’s eyes oozed away; when he spoke, his voice bounded as if 
it were darting about at random, picking stray sentences: “Everybody 
is entitled to a livelihood . . . How am 1 going to get it, if nobody 
gives me my chance?” 

“How did 1 get mine?” 

“I wasn’t born owning a steel plant.” 

“Was I?” 

“1 can do anything you can — if you’ll teach me.” 

“Who taught me?” 

“Why do you keep saying that? I’m not talking about you!” 

“I am.” 

In a moment. Philip muttered. “What do you have to worry about? 
It’s not your livelihood that’s in question!” 

Rearden pointed to the figures of men in the steaming rays of the 
furnace. “Can you do what they’re doing?” 

“i don’t see what you’re — ” 

“What will happen if 1 put you there and you ruin a heat of steel 
for me?" 

“What’s more important, that vour damn steel gets poured or that 
1 eat?” 

“How do you propose to eat if the steel doesn't get poured?” 

Philip's face assumed a look of reproach “I’m not in a position 
to argue with you right now. since you hold the upper hand.” 

“Then don’t argue.” 

“Uh?” 

“Keep your mouth shut and get out ol here.” 

“Rut l meant—” He stopped. 

Rearden chuckled. “You meant that it’s I who should keep my 
mouth shut, because I hold the upper hand, and should give in to 
you, because you hold no hand at all?” 

“That's a peculiarly crude way of stating a moral principle ” 

“But that’s what your moral principle amounts to. doesn’t it?” 

“You can’t discuss morality in materialistic terms.” 

“We’re discussing a job in a steel plant -and. boy 1 is that a malcn 
alistic place!” 

Philip’s body drew a shade tighter together and his eyes became 
a shade more glazed, as if in fear of the place around him. in resent- 
ment of its sight, in an effort not to concede its reality. He said, in 
the soft, stubborn whine of a voodoo incantation. “It’s a moral im- 
perative, universally conceded in our day and age. that every man is 
entitled to a job.” His voice rose: ‘Tin entitled to it!” 

“You are? Cio on, then, collect your claim ” 

“Uh?” 

“Collect your job. Pick it off the busfi where you think it grows.” 

“I mean — ” { 

“You mean that it doesn’t? You meafo that you need it, but can’t 
create it? You mean that you’re entitled to a iob which / must create 
for you?” 

“Yes!” 

“And if 1 don’t?” 

The silence went stretching through second after second. “1 don’t 

850 



understand you,” said Philip: his voice had the angry bewilderment 
of a man who recites the formulas of a well -tested role, but keeps 
getting the wrong cues in answer. “1 don’t understand why one can’t 
talk to you any more. I don’t understand what sort of theory you’re 
propounding and—” 

“Oh yes, you do.” 

As if refusing to believe that the formulas could fail, Philip burst 
out with: “Since when did you take to abstract philosophy? You’re 
only a businessman, you’re not qualified to deal with questions of 
principle, you ought to leave it to the experts who have conceded 
for centuries — ’ 

“Cut it, Philip. What’s the gimmick?” 

“Gimmick?” 

“Why the sudden ambition?” 

“Well, at a time like this . . 

“Like what?” 

“Well, every man has the right to have some means of support 
and . . . and not be left to be tossed aside . . When things are so 
uncertain, a man’s got to have some security . . . some foothold . . . 

I mean, at a time like this, if anything happened to you. I’d have 
no — ” 

“What do you expect to happen to me?” 

“Oh, I don’t! I don’t!” The cry was oddly, incomprehensibly genu- 
ine. “J don’t expect anything to happen! . . . Do you?” 

“Such as what?” 

“How do I know? . . . But I've got nothing except the pittance 
you give me and . . , and you might change your mind any time.” 

“1 might.” 

‘‘And I haven't any hold on you at all.” 

“Why did it take you that many years to realize it and start wor- 
rying? Why now 9 ” 

“Because . . . because you’ve changed. You . . you used to have 
a sense of duty and moral responsibility, but . . you’re losing it. 
You’re losing it, aren't you?” 

Kearden stood studying him silently: there was something peculiar 
in Philip’s manner of sliding toward questions, as if his words were 
accidental, but the too casual, the faintly insistent questions were the 
key to his purpose. 

“Well. I’ll be glad to take the burden off your shoulders, if I'm a 
burden to you!” Philip snapped suddenly. “Just give me a job. and 
vour conscience won't have to bother you about me any longer!” 

it doesn't.” 

“That’s what l mean! You don’t care. You don't care what be- 
comes of any of us, do you?” 

“Of whom?” 

“Why . . . Mother and me and . . . and mankind in general. But 
I'm not going to appeal to your better self. I know that you’re ready 
to ditch me at a moment’s notice, so — ” 

“You’re lying, Philip. Thai’s not what you’re worried about. If it 
were, you’d be angling for a chunk of cash, not lor a job, not — ” 

H5\ 



“No! I want a job!” The cry was immediate and almost frantic. 
“Don't try to buy me off with cash! I want a job!" 

“Pull yourself together, you poor louse. Do you hear what 
you’re saying?” 

Philip spit out his answer with impotent hatred: “You can’t talk 
to me that way!” 

“Can you?" 

“1 only — ” 

“To buy you off? Why should I try to buy you off— instead of 
kicking you out, as I should have, years ago?” 

“Well, after all. I’m your brother!” 

“What is that supposed to mean?” 

“One’s supposed to have some sort of leelmg for one’s brother.” 

“Do you?" 

Philip’s mouth swelled petulantly: he did not answer: he waited; 
Rearden let him wait. Philip muttered, “You’re supposed ... at 
least ... to have some consideration for my feelings . . but you 

haven’t.” 

“Have you for mine?” 

“Yours? Your feelings?" It was not malice in Philip’s voice, but 
worse: it was a genuine, indignant astonishment. “You haven’t any 
feelings. You’ve never felt anything at all. You’ve never suffered !” 

It was as if a sum of years hit Rearden in the face, by means ot 
a sensation and a sight: the exact sensation of what he had felt in 
the cab of the first train’s engine on the John Halt Line— -and the 
sight of Philip’s eyes, the pale, halt-liquid eyes piesentmg the utter 
most of human degiadation: an uncontested pain, and. with the ob- 
scene insolence of a skeleton toward a living being, demanding that 
his pain be held as the highest of values. You’ve never suffered, the 
eyes were saying to him accusingly— while he was seeing the night 
in his office when his ore mines were taken away from him— the 
moment when he had signed the Gift Certificate surrendering Reai- 
den Metal— the month of days inside a plane that searched for the 
remains of Dagny’s body. You’ve never suffered, the eyes were say- 
ing with self-righteous scorn — while he remembered the sensation of 
proud chastity with which he had fought through those moments, 
refusing to surrender to pain, a sensation made of his love, of his 
loyalty of his knowledge that joy is the goal of existence, and joy is 
not to be stumbled upon, but to be achieved, and the act of treason 
is to let its vision drown in the swamp of the moment’s torture. 
You’ve never suffered, the dead stare of the eyes was saying, you’ve 
never felt anything, because only to suffer is to feel— there’s no such 
thing as joy, there’s only pain and the, absence of pain: only pain 
and the zero, when one feels nothing- -[puffer. I’m twisted by suffer- 
ing, I’m made of undiluted suffering, that’s my purity, that’s my 
virtue — and yours, you the untwisted ope, you the uncomplaining, 
yours is to relieve me of my pain — cut your unsuffering body* to 
patch up mine, cut your unfeeling soul U> stop mine from feeling - 
and we’H achieve the ultimate ideal, th<r triumph over life, the zero! 
He was seeing the nature of those who, for centuries, had not re- 

852 



coiled from the preachers of annihilation — he was seeing the nature 
of the enemies he had been fighting all his life. 

“Philip,’’ he said, “get out of here/’ His voice was like a ray of 
sunlight in a morgue, il was the plain, dry, daily voice of a business- 
man, the sound of health, addressed to an enemy one could not 
honor by anger, nor even by horror “And don’t ever try to enter 
these mills again, because there will be orders at every gate to throw 
you out, if you try it.” 

“Well, after all,” said Philip, in the angry and cautious tone of a 
tentative threat, “I could have my friends assign me to a job here 
and compel you to accept it!” 

Rcardcn had started to go. but he stopped and turned to look at 
his brother. 

Philip’s moment of grasping a sudden revelation was not accom- 
plished by means of thought, but by means of that dark sensation 
which was his only mode of consciousness: he tell a sensation of 
terror, squeezing his throat, shivering down into his stomach — he 
was seeing the spread of the mills, with the roving streamers of flame, 
with the ladles of molten metal sailing through space on delicate 
cables, with open pits the color of glowing coal, with cranes coming 
at his head, pounding past, holding tons ol steel by the invisible 
power of magnets— and he knew that he was afraid of this place, 
afraid to the death, that he dared not move without the protection 
and guidance of the man before him — then he looked at the tall, 
straight figure standing casually still, the figure with the unflinching 
eyes whose sight had cut through rock and flame to build this place — 
and then he knew how easily the man he was pioposing to compel 
could let a single bucket of metal tilt over a second ahead of its time 
or let a single crane drop its load a foot short ol its goal, and there 
would be nothing left of him. ol Philip the claimant— and his only 
protection lay in the fact that his mind would think of such actions, 
but the mind ol Hank Rearden would not. 

“But we'd better keep it on a friendly basis.' " said Philip. 

“You’d better.” said Rearden and walked away. 

Men who worship pain - thought Rearden. staring at the image of 
Ihe enemies he had never been able to understand -they're men 
who worship pain. It seemed monstrous, yet peculiarly devoid of 
importance. He felt nothing. It was like trying to summon emotion 
toward inanimate objects, toward refuse sliding down a mountainside 
to crush him. One could flee from the slide or build retaining walls 
against it or be crushed — but one could not grant any anger, indigna- 
tion or moral concern to the senseless motions of the unliving; no, 
worse, he thought — the anti-living. 

The same sense of detached unconcern remained with him while 
he sat in a Philadelphia courtroom and watched men perform the 
motions which were to grant him his divorce. He watched them utter 
mechanical generalities, recite vague phrases of fraudulent evidence, 
play an intricate game of stretching words to convey no facts and 
no meaning. He had paid them to do it— he whom the law permitted 
no other way to gain his freedom, no right to state the facts and 
plead the truth — the law which delivered his fate, not to objective 

853 



rules objectively defined, but to the arbitrary mercy of a judge with 
a wizened f$ce and a look of empty cunning. , 

Lillian was not present in the courtroom; her attorney made ges- 
tures once in a while, with the energy of letting water run through 
his fingers. They all knew the verdict in advance and they knew its 
reason; no other reason had existed for years, where no standards, 
save whim, had existed. They seemed to regard it as their ngbrtul 
prerogative; they acted as if the purpose of the procedure were not 
to try a case, but to give them jobs, as if their jobs were to recite 
the appropriate formulas with no responsibility to know what the 
formulas accomplished, as if a courtroom were the one place where 
questions of right and wrong were irrelevant and they, the men in 
charge ot dispensing justice, were safely w ise enough to know that no 
justice existed. They acted like savages performing a ritual devised to 
set them free oi objective reality. 

But the ten years of his marriage had been real, he thought — and 
these were the men who assumed the power to dispose of it, to 
decide whether he would have a chance of contentment on earth or 
be condemned to torture for the rest of his lifetime. He remembered 
the austerely pitiless respect he had felt for his contract of marriage, 
for all his contracts and all h»s legal obligations - and he saw' what 
sort of legality his scrupulous observance was expected to serve. 

He noticed that the puppets of the courtroom had started by glanc- 
ing at him in the sly, wise manner of fellow conspirators sharing a 
common guilt, mutually sale from moral condemnation. Then, when 
they 7 observed that he was the only man in the room who looked 
steadily straight at anyone's lace, he saw resentment growing in then- 
eyes. Incredulously, he realized what it was that had been expected 
of him: he, the victim, chained, bound, gagged and left with no re- 
course save to bribery, had been expected to believe that the farce 
he had purchased was a process of law, that the edicts enslaving him 
had moral validity, that he was guilty of corrupting the integrity of 
the guardians of justice, and that the blame was his, not theirs. It 
was like blaming the victim of a holdup tor corrupting the integrity 
of the thug. And yet — he thought— through all the generations of 
political extortion, it was not the looting bureaucrats who had taken 
the blame, but the chained industrialists, not the men who peddled 
legal favors, but the men who were forced to buy them; and through 
all those generations of crusades against corruption, the remedy hail 
always been, not the liberating of the victims, but the granting of 
wider powers for extortion to the extortionists. The only guilt of the 
victims, he thought, had been that they accepted it as guilt. 

When he walked out of the courtroom -into the chilly drizzle of a 
gray afternoon, he felt as if he had beefi divorced, not only from 
Lillian, but from the whole of the human? society that supported the 
procedure he had witnessed. \ 

The face of his attorney, an elderly man of the old-fashioned 
school, wore an expression that made it look as if he longed to take 
a bath. “Say, Hank,” he asked as sole comment, “is there something 
the looters are anxious to get from you right now?” “Not that 1 
know of. Why?” “The thing went too smoothly. There were a few 

854 



points at which I expected pressure and hints for some extras, but 
the boys sailed past and took no advantage of it. Looks to me as if 
orders had come lrom on high to treat you gently and let you have 
your way. Are they planning something against your mills? 1 ’ “Not 
that 1 know of,” said Reardcn — and was astonished to hear it in his 
mind: Not that 1 care. 

it was on the same afternoon, at the mills, that he saw the Wet 
Nurse hurrying toward him— a gangling, coltish figure with a peculiar 
mixture of brusqueness, awkwardness and decisiveness. 

“Mr. Rearden, 1 would like to speak to you.” His voice was diffi- 
dent, yet oddly hrm. 

“Go ahead.” 

“There’s something l want to ask \ou.” The boy’s face was solemn 
and taut. “1 want you to know that I know you should refuse me, 
but 1 want to ask it just the same . . . and . . and if it's presumptuous, 
then just tell me to go to hell.” 

“Okay. Try it.” 

“Mr. Rearden, would you give me a job?” It was the effort to 
sound normal that betrayed the days ot struggle behind the question. 
“I want to quit what I’m doing and go to work 1 mean, real work — 
in steel-making, like 1 thought I'd started to. once I want to earn 
my keep. I’m tired ot being a bedbug.” 

Rearden could not resist smiling and reminding him. in the tone 
ot a quotation, “Now why use such words, Non-Absolute? It we 
don’t use ugly words, we won't have any ugliness and- But he 
saw the desperate earnestness ot the boy's face 'and stopped, his 
smile vanishing. 

“I mean it, Mr. Rearden And 1 know what the word means and 
it’s the right word. I'm tired ol being paid, with your money, to do 
nothing except make it impossible tor you to make any money at 
all. 1 know that anyone who works today is only a sucker tor bastards 
like me. but . . . well, God damn it. I'd rather be a sucker, if that’s 
all theie’s left to be!” His voice had risen to a ciy. “1 beg your 
pardon, Mr Rearden,” he said slitlly. looking away In a moment, 
he went on in his woodenly unemotional tone. "1 want to get our of 
the Deputy-Direetor-oMXslribuiion racket. 1 don't know that I'd be 
of much use to you. I've got a college diploma m metallurgy, but 
that’s not worth the paper it’s printed on. But l think I’ve learned 
a little about the work in the two years I've been here- -and if you 
could use me at all, as a sweeper or scrap man or whatever you’d 
trust me with, Pd tell them where to put the deputy directorship and 
I’d go to work for you tomorrow, next week, this minute or whenever 
you say.” He avoided looking at Rearden. not in a manner of eva- 
sion, but as if he had no right to do it. 

“Why were you atraid to ask me?” said Rearden gently. 

The boy glanced at him with indignant astonishment, as if the 
answer were self-evident. “Because after the way l started here and 
the way I acted and what Pm deputy of, if 1 come asking you for 
favors, you ought to kick me in the teeth!” 

“You have learned a great deal in the two years you’ve been 
here.” 


855 



“No, I — ” He glanced at Rearden, understood, looked away and 
said woodenly, “Yeah ... if that’s what you mean. 1 ' 

“Listen, kid, l’d give you a job this minute and I’d trust you with 
more than a sweeper’s job, if it were up to me. But have you forgot- 
ten the Unification Board? I'm not allowed to hire you and you’re 
not allowed to quit. Sure, men are quitting all the time, and we’re 
hiring others under phony names and fancy papers proving that 
they’ve worked here for years. You know it, and thanks for keeping 
your mouth shut. But do you think that if I hired you that way, your 
friends in Washington would miss it?” 

The boy shook his head slowly. 

“Do you think that if you quit their service to become a sweeper, 
they wouldn’t understand your reason?” 

The boy nodded. 

“Would they let you go?” 

The boy shook his head. After a moment, he said in a tone of 
forlorn astonishment, “I hadn’t thought of that at all, Mr. Rearden. 
I forgot them. I kept thinking of whether you’d want me or not and 
that the only thing that counted was your decision.” 

“I know.” 

“And ... it is the only thing that counts, in fact.” 

“Yes, Non- Absolute, in fact." 

The boy’s mouth jerked suddenly into the brief, mirthless twist ot 
a smile. “I guess I’m tied worse than any sucker . . 

“Yes, There's nothing you can do now. except apply to the Unifi- 
cation Board for permission to change your job. I'll support your 
application, if you want to try— only l don't think they'll grant it. I 
don’t think they’ll let you work for me.” 

“No. They won't.” 

“If you maneuver enough and lie enough, they might permit you 
to transfer to a private job — with some other steel company.” 

“No! I don’t want to go anywhere else! I don't want to leave this 
place!” He stood looking off at the invisible vapor ol rain over the 
flame of the furnaces. After a while, he said quietly, “I’d better slay 
put, I guess. I’d better go on being a deputy looter. Besides, if 1 left, 
God only knows w'hat soil ot bastard they’d saddle you with in my 
place!” He turned. “They’re up to something, Mr. Rearden. I don’t 
know' what it is, but they’re getting ready to spring something on 
you.” 

“What?” 

“I don’t know. But they’ve been watchjng every opening here, in 
the last few weeks, every desertion, and dipping their own gang in. 
A queer sort of gang, too — real goons, sopic of them, that I’d swear 
never stepped inside a steel plant before] I’ve had orders to get as 
many of ‘our boys’ in as possible. 'ITicy wouldn’t tell me why. I <jon’t 
know what it is they’re planning. I’ve tried to pump them, but they’re 
acting pretty cagey about it. I don’t think they trust me any more. 
I’m losing the right touch, I guess. All I know is they’re getting set 
to pull something here.” 

“Thanks for warning me.” 

“I’ll try to get the dope on it. I’ll try my damndest to get it in 

856 



time.” He turned brusquely and started off, but stopped. “Mr. Rear- 
den, if it were up to you, you would have hired me?” 

“1 would have, gladly and at once.” 

“Thank you, Mr. Reardon,” he said, his voice solemn and low, 
then walked away. 

Reardon stood looking after him, seeing, with a tearing smile of 
pity, what it was that the ex-relativist, the cx-pragmatist, the ex- 
amorahst was carrying away with him for consolation. 

* r 

On the afternoon of September 11 , a copper wire broke in Minne- 
sota, stopping the belts of a gram elevator at a small country station 
of Taggart Transcontinental. 

A flood of wheat was moving down the highways, the roads, the 
abandoned trails of the countryside, emptying thousands of acres of 
farmland upon the fragile dams of the railroad’s stations, ft was 
moving day and night, the first trickles growing into streams, then 
livers, then torrents — moving on palsied trucks with coughing, tuber- 
cular motors— on wagons pulled by the rusty skeletons of starving 
horses— on carts pulled by oxen — on the nerves and last energy of 
men who had lived through two years of disaster for the triumphant 
reward ot this autumn's giant har\e*l. men who had patched their 
trucks and carts with wire, blankets, ropes and sleepless nights, to 
make them hold together for this one more journey, to carry the 
grain and collapse at destination, hut to give their owners a chance 
at survival. 

Every year, at this season, another movement had gone clicking 
across the country, drawing freight cars from all corners of the conti- 
nent to the Minnesota Division of iaggart Transcontinental, the beat 
of tram wheels preceding the creak of the wagons, like an advance 
echo rigorously planned, ordered and timed to meet the flood. The 
Minnesota Division drowsed through the year, to come to violent 
life for the sounds of the harvest; fourteen thousand freight cars had 
lammed its yards each year: fifteen thousand were expected this time. 
The litst of the wheat trains had started to channel the Hood into 
the hungry flour mills, then bakeries, then stomachs of the nation — 
hut every train, car and storage elevator counted, and there was no 
minute or inch of space to spare. 

Eddie Willers watched Dagny’s lace as she went through the cards 
ot her emergency file; he could tell the content of the cards by her 
expression. “The Terminal.” she said quietly, closing the tile. “Phone 
the Terminal downstairs and have them ship half their stock of wire 
to Minnesota.” Eddie said nothing and obeyed. 

He said nothing, the morning when he put on her desk a telegram 
from the Taggart office in Washington, informing them of the direc* 
live which, due to the critical shortage of copper, ordered govern- 
ment agents to seize all copper mines and operate them as a public 
utility. “Well,** she said, dropping the telegram into the wastebasket, 
“that’s the end of Montana.” 

She said nothing when James Taggart announced to her that he 
was issuing an order to discontinue all dining cars on T aggart trains. 
“We can’t afford it any longer,” he explained, “we’ve always lost 

857 



money on those goddamn diners, and when there's no food to gel, 
when restaurants are closing because they can’t grab hold of a pound 
of horse meat anywhere, how can railroads be expected to do it? 
Why in hell should we have to feed the passengers, anyway? They’re 
lucky if we give them transportation, they’d travel in cattle cars if 
necessary, let 'em pack their own box lunches, what do we care?- - 
they’ve got no other trains to take!” 

The telephone on her desk had become, not a voice of business, 
but an alarm suen for the desperate appeals of disaster. “Miss Tag- 
gart. we have no copper wire!” “Nails, Miss Taggart, plain nails, 
could you tell somebody to send us a keg of nails?” “Can you find 
any paint. Miss Taggart, any sort of waterproof paint anywhere?” 

But thirty million dollars of subsidy money from Washington had 
been plowed into Project Soybean — an enormous acreage in Louisi- 
ana. where a harvest of soybeans was ripening, as advocated and 
organized by Emma Chalrneis, for (he purpose ot reconditioning the 
dietary habits ot the nation, Emma Chalmers, better known as Kip’s 
Ma, was an old sociologist who had hung about Washington for 
years, as other women of her age and type hang about barrooms. 
For some reason which nobody could define, the death of her son 
in the tunnel catastrophe had given her in Washington an aura of 
martyrdom, heightened by her recent conversion to Buddhism. “The 
soybean is a much moic sturdy, nutritious and economical plant than 
all the extravagant foods which our wasteful, self-indulgent diet has 
conditioned us to expect.” Kip’s Ma had said over the radio; her 
voice always sounded as if it were falling in drops, not of water, but 
of mayonnaise. “Soybeans make an excellent substitute for bread 
meat, cereals and coffee — and il all ot us were compelled to adopt 
soybeans as our staple diet, it would solve the national food crisis 
and make it possible to feed more people. The greatest food for the 
greatest number — that’s my slogan. At a time of desperate public 
need, it’s our duty to sacrifice our luxurious tastes and eat our way 
back to prosperity by adapting ourselves to the simple, wholesome 
foodstuff on which the peoples of the Orient have so nobly subsisted 
for centuries. There’s a great deal that we could learn trom the 
peoples of the Orient.” 

“Copper tubing. Miss Taggart, could you get some copper tubing 
for us somewhere?” the voices were pleading over her telephone 
“Rail spikes. Miss Taggart!” “Screwdrivers, Miss Taggart!” “Light 
bulbs. Miss Taggart, there's no electric light bulbs to be had any- 
where within two hundred miles of us!” 

But five million dollars was being spdnt by the office of Morale 
Conditioning on the People’s Opera ^Company, which traveled 
through the country, giving free performances to people who, on one 
meal a day, could not afford the energy |o walk to the opera house 
Seven million dollars had been granted ko a psychologist in charge 
of a project to solve the world crisis by ^research into the nature of 
brother-love. Ten million dollars had Eefen granted to the manufac- 
turer of a new electronic cigarette lighter — but there were no ciga- 
rettes in the shops of the country. There were flashlights on the 
market, but no batteries; there were radios, but no tubes; there were 

858 



cameras, but no film. "Hie production of airplanes had been declared 
“temporarily suspended." Air travel for private purposes had been 
forbidden, and reserved exclusively for missions of “public need.” 
An industrialist traveling to save his factory was not considered as 
publicly needed and could not get aboard a plane; an official travel- 
ing to collect taxes was and could. 

“People are stealing nuts and bolts out of rail plates. Miss Taggart, 
stealing them at night, and our stock is running out, the division 
storehouse is bare, what are we to do. Miss Taggart?" 

But a super-color-four-foot-screen television set was being erected 
tor tourists in a People's Park in Washington -and a super-cyclotron 
for the study of cosmic rays was being erected at the State Science 
Institute, to be completed in ten years 

‘The trouble with out modern world," Dr. Robert Stadler said 
over the iadio, at the ceremonies launching the construction of the 
cyclotron, “is that too many people think too much. It is the cause 
ol all our current fears and doubts. An enlightened citizenry should 
abandon the superstitious worship of logic and the outmoded reli- 
ance on reason. Just as laymen leave medicine to doctors and elec- 
tronics to engineers', so people who are not qualified to think should 
leave all thinking to the experts and have faith in the experts' higher 
authority Only experts are able to understand the discoveries of 
modem science, which have proved that thought is an illusion and 
that the mind is a myth." 

“This age of misery is God's punishment to man tor the sin of 
relying on his mind!" snarled the triumphant voices of mystics of 
every sect and sort, on street corners, in ram-soaked tents, m crum- 
bling temples “This world ordeal is the result of man’s attempt to 
live by reason! this is where thinking, logic and science have brought 
you! And there’s to be no salvation until men realize that their 
mortal mind is impotent to solve their problems and go back to faith, 
taith in God. faith in a higher authority!" 

And confronting her daily there was the final product of it all, the 
heir and collectoi — Cully Meigs, the man impervious to thought. 
Cliffy Meigs strode through the offices of Taggart Transcontinental, 
wearing a semi-military tunic and slapping a shiny leather briefcase 
against his shiny leather leggings. He earned an automatic pistol in 
one pocket and a rabbit’s foot in the other. 

Cuffy Meigs tried to avoid her; his manner was part scorn, as if 
he considered her an impractical idealist, part superstitious awe. as 
if she possessed some incomprehensible power with which he pre- 
ferred not to tangle. He acted as if her presence did not belong to 
his view of a railroad, yet as if hers were the one presence he dared 
not challenge. There was a touch of impatient resentment in his 
manner toward Jim, as it it were Jim's duty to deal with her and to 
protect him; just as he expected Jim to keep the railroad in running 
order and leave him free for activities of more practical a nature, so 
he expected Jim to keep her in line, as part of the equipment. 

Beyond the window of her office, like a patch of adhesive plaster 
stuck over a wound on the sky, the page of the calendar hung blank 
m the distance. The calendar had never been repaired since the night 

859 



of Francisco’s farewell. The officials who had rushed to the tower, 
that night, had knocked the calendar’s motor to a stop, while tearing 
the film out of the projector. They had found the small square of 
Francisco’s message, pasted into the strip of numbered days, but who 
had pasted it there, who had entered the locked room and when and 
how, was never discovered by the three commissions still investigat 
ing the case. Pending the outcome ot their efforts, the page hung 
blank and still above the city. 

It was blank on the afternoon of September 14, when the tele- 
phone rang in her office. “A man from Minnesota,” said the voice 
of her secretary. 

She had told her secretary that she would accept all calls of this 
kind. They were the appeals for help and her only source of informa 
tion. At a time when the voices of railroad officials uttered nothing 
but sounds designed to avoid communication, the voices of nameless 
men were her last link to the system, the last sparks ol reason and 
tortured honesty flashing briefly through the miles of Taggart track. 

“Miss Taggart, it is not my place to call you, but nobody else 
will,” said the voice that came on the wire, this time; the voice 
sounded young and too calm. “In another day or two, a disaster’s 
going to happen here the like ot which they’ve never seen, and they 
won’t be able to hide it any longer, only it will be too late by then, 
and maybe it's too late already.” 

“What is it? Who are you?” 

“One of your employees of the Minnesota Division, Miss Taggart. 
In another day or two, the trains will stop running out ot here — and 
you know what that means, at the height of the harvest. At the 
height of the biggest harvest we’ve ever had. lhey’ll stop, because 
we have no cars. The harvest freight cars have not been sent to us 
this year.” 

“What did you say?” She felt as il minutes went by between the 
words of the unnatural voice that did not sound like her own. 

“The cars have not been sent. Fifteen thousand should have been 
here by now. As tar as l could learn, about eight thousand cars is 
all we got. I’ve been calling Division Headquarters for a week. 
They’ve been telling me not to worry. Last time, they told me to 
mind my own damn business. Every shed, silo, elevator, warehouse, 
garage and dance hall along the track is tilled with wheat. At the 
Sherman elevators, there’s a line of farmers' trucks and wagons two 
miles long, wailing on the road. At Lakewood Station, the square is 
packed solid and has been for three nights. They keep telling us it’s 
only temporary, the cars are coming an# wc*ll catch up. We won t. 
There aren’t any cars coming. I’ve called everyone I could. I know, 
by the way they answer. They know, arid not one of them wants to 
admit it. They’re scared, scared to movq or speak or ask or answer. 
All they’re thinking of is who will be blamed when that harvest rots 
here around the stations — and not of who’s going to move it. Ma>;bc 
nobody can, now. Maybe there’s nothing you can do about it, either. 
But I thought you’re the only person left who’d want to know and 
that somebody had to tell you.” 

”1 , . She made an effort to breathe. ”1 see . . . Who are you?’’ 

860 



“The name wouldn’t matter. When I hang up, I will have become 
a deserter. I don’t want to stay here to see it when it happens. I 
don’t want any part of it any more. Good luck to you, Miss Taggart.” 
She heard the click. ‘"Thank you,” she said over a dead wire. 

The next time she noticed the office around her and permitted 
herself to feel, it was noon of the following day. She stood in the 
middle of the office, running stiff, spread fingers through a strand of 
hair, brushing it back off her face — and for an instant, she wondered 
where she was and what was the unbelievable thing that had hap- 
pened in the last twenty hours. What she fell was horror, and she 
knew that she had felt it from the first words of the man on the 
wire, only there had been no time to know it 
There was not much that remained in her mind of the last twenty 
hours, only disconnected bits, held together by the single constant 
that had made them possible — by the soft, loose faces of men, who 
lought to hide from themselves that they knew the answers to the 
questions she asked. 

From the moment when she was told that the manager of the Car 
Service Department had been out of town tor a week and had left 
no address where one could reach him — she knew that the report of 
the man from Minnesota was true. Then came the faces of the assis- 
tants in the Car Service Department, who would neither confirm the 
report nor deny it, but kept showing her papers, orders, forms* file 
cards that bore words in the English language, but no connection to 
intelligible facts. “Were the freight cars sent to Minnesota?'" “Form 
357W is filled out in every particular, as required by the office of 
the Co-ordinator m conformance with the instructions of the comp- 
troller and by Directive 1 1-49V* "Were the freight cars sent to Min- 
nesota?’' “The entries for the months of August and September have 
been processed by — ” “Were the freight cars sent to Minnesota?” 
“My files indicate the locations of freight cars by state, date, classifi- 
cation and — ” “Do you know whether the cars were sent to Minne- 
sota?” “As to the interstate motion of freight cars, I would have to 
refer you to the files ol Mr. Henson and of--" 

"I here was nothing to learn from the files, lhere were careful en- 
tries. each conveying four possible meanings, with references which 
led to references which led to final reference which was missing from 
the files. It did not take her long to discover that the cars had not 
been sent to Minnesota and that the order had come from Cuffy 
Meigs— but who had carried it out, who had tangled the trail, what 
steps had been taken by w hat compliant men to preserve the appear- 
ance of a safely normal operation, without a single cry of protest to 
arouse some braver man's attention, who had falsified the reports, 
and where the cars had gone— seemed, at first, impossible to Learn. 

'Ihrough the hours of that night -while a small, desperate crew 
under the command of Eddie Willers kept calling every division 
point, every yard, depot, station, spur and siding of Taggart Trans- 
continental for every freight car in sight or reach, ordering them to 
unload, drop, dump, scuttle anything and proceed to Minnesota at 
once, while they kept calling the yards, stations and presidents of 
every railroad still half in existence anywhere across the map. beg- 

861 



ging for cars for Minnesota — she went through the task of tracing 
from face to coward’s face the destination of the freight cars that 
had vanished. 

She went from railroad executives to wealthy shippers to Washing- 
ton officials and back to the railroad— by cab, by phone, by wire — 
pursuing a trail of half-uttered hints. The trail approached its end 
when she heard the pinch-lipped voice of a public relations woman 
in a Washington office, saying resentfully over the telephone wire, 
“Well, after all, it is a matter ot opinion whether wheat is essential 
to a nation’s welfare — there are those of more progressive views who 
feel that the soybean is, perhaps, of far greater value” — and then, 
by noon, she stood in the middle of her office, knowing that the 
freight cars intended for the wheat of Minnesota had been sent, 
instead, to carry the soybeans from the Louisiana swamps of Kip’s 
Mas project. 

The first story of the Minnesota disaster appeared in the newspa- 
pers three days later. It reported that the fanners who had waited 
in the streets of Lakewood for six days, with no place to store their 
wheat and no trains to carry it, had demolished the local courthouse, 
the mayor’s home and the railroad station. Then the stones vanished 
abruptly and the newspapers kept silent, then began to print admoni- 
tions urging people not to believe unpatriotic rumors. 

While the Hour mills and grain markets ot the country were 
screaming over the phones and the telegraph wires, sending pleas to 
New York and delegations to Washington, while strings of freight 
cars from random corners of the continent wcie crawling like rusty 
caterpillars across the map in the direction of Minnesota — the wheat 
and hope of the country were wailing to perish along an empty track, 
under the unchanging green light of signals that called for motion 
to trains that were not there. 

At the communication desks of Taggart Transcontinental, a small 
crew kept calling for freight cars, repeating, like the crew of a sinking 
ship, an S.O.S. that remained unheard. There were freight cars held 
loaded for months in the yards of the companies owned by the 
friends of pull-peddlers, who ignored the frantic demands to unload 
the cars and release them. ‘You can tell that railroad to--" followed 
by untransmissible words, was the message of the Smather Brothers 
of Arizona in answer to the S.O.S. ot New York. 

In Minnesota, they were seizing cars from every siding, from the 
Mesabi Range, from the ore mines of Paul Larkin where the cats 
had stood waiting for a dribble of iron; They were pouring wheat 
into ore cars, into coal cars, into boarded stock cars that went spilling 
thin gold trickles along the track as th^y clattered off. They were 
pouring wheat into passenger coaches, oyer seats, racks and fixtures, 
io send it off, to get it moving, even if? it went moving into track- 
side ditches in the sudden crash of breaking springs, in the explosions 
sef off by burning journal boxes. * 

They fought for movement, for movement with no thought of des 
tination, for movement as such, like a paralytic under a stroke, strug- 
gling in wild, stiff, incredulous jerks against the realization that 
movement was suddenly impossible. There were no other railroads: 

862 



James Taggart had killed them; there were no boats on the Lakes: 
Paul Larkin had killed them. There was only the single line of rail 
and a net of neglected highways. 

'The trucks and wagons of waiting farmers started trickling blindly 
down the roads, with no maps, no gas, no feed for horses — moving 
south, south toward the vision of flour mills awaiting them some- 
where, with no knowledge of the distances ahead, but with the 
knowledge of death behind them — moving, to collapse on the roads, 
in the gullies, in the breaks of rotted bridges. One farmer was found, 
half a mile south of the wreck of his truck, lying dead in a ditch, 
face down, still clutching a sack of wheat on his shoulders. Then rain 
clouds burst over the prairies of Minnesota; the rain went eating the 
wheat into rot at the waiting railroad stations; it went hammering 
the piles spilled along the roads, washing gold kernels into the soil. 

The men in Washington wcie last to be reached by the panic. 
They watched, not the news from Minnesota, but the precarious 
balance of their friendships and commitments; they weighed, not the 
fate of the harvest, but the unknowable result of unpredictable emo- 
tions in unthinking men of unlimited power. They waited, they 
evaded all pleas, they declared, “Oh, ridiculous, there's nothing to 
worry about! Those Taggart people have always moved that wheat 
on schedule, lhe\T! find some way to move it 1 ” 

Then, when the State Chief Executive of Minnesota sent a request 
to Washington for the assistance of the Army against the riots he 
was unable to control- three directives burst forth within two hours, 
slopping all trains in the country, commandeering all cars to speed 
to Minnesota. An order signed by Wesley Mouch demanded the 
immediate release of the freight cars held in the service of Kip’s Ma. 
But by that time, it was too late. Ma s freight cars were m California, 
where the soybeans had been sent to a progressive concern made 
up of sociologists preaching the cult of Oriental austerity, and of 
businessmen formerly in the numbers racket 

In Minnesota, farmers were setting tire to then own farms, they 
weie demolishing grain elevators and the homes of county officials, 
they were fighting along the track of the railroad, some to tear it 
up, some to defend it with their lives — and, with no goal to reach 
save violence, they were dying in the streets ot gutted towns and in 
the silent gullies of a roadless night. 

Then there was only the acrid stench of giain rotting in half-smol- 
dering piles — a few columns of smoke rising from the plains, standing 
still in the air over blackened ruins — and, in an office in Pennsylva- 
nia, Hank Reardon sitting at his desk. Uxiking at a list of men who 
had gone bankrupt: they were the manufacturers of farm equipment, 
who could not be paid and would not be able to pay him. 

The harvest of soybeans did not reach the markets of the country; 
it had been reaped prematurely, it was moldy and unfit for 
consumption. 

* * 

On the night of October 15, a copper wire broke in New York 
City, in an underground control tower of the Taggart Terminal, ex- 
tinguishing the lights of the signals. 

m 



It was only the breach of one wire, but it produced a short circuit 
in the interlocking traffic system, and the signals of motion or danger 
disappeared from the panels of the control towers and from among 
the strands of rail. The red and green lenses remained red and green, 
not with the living radiance of sight, but with the dead stare of glass 
eyes. On the edge of the city, a cluster of trains gathered at the 
entrance to the Terminal tunnels and grew through the minutes of 
stillness, like blood damned by a clot inside a vein, unable to rush 
into the chambers of the heart. 

Dagny, that night, was sitting at a table in a private dining room 
of the Wayne-Falkland, The wax of candles was dripping down on 
the white camellia and laurel leaves at the base of the silver candle- 
sticks, arithmetical calculations were penciled on the damask linen 
tablecloth, and a cigar butt was swimming in a linger bowl. The six 
men in formal dinner jackets, facing her about the table, were Wesley 
Mouch, Eugene Lawson, Dr. Floyd Ferris, Clem Weatherby, James 
Taggart and Cuffy Meigs. 

"‘Why?" she had asked, when Jim had told her that she had to attend 
that dinner. '‘Well . . . because our Board of Directors is to meet next 
week/’ “And?” “You’re interested in what’s going to be decided about 
our Minnesota Line, aren't you?” “Is that going to be decided at the 
Board meeting?” “Well, not exactly ” “Is it going to be decided at 
this dinner?” “Not exactly, but . . . oh. why do you always have to 
be so definite? Nothing's ever definite. Besides, they insisted that 
they wanted you to come.” “Why?” “Isn’t that sufficient?” 

She did not ask why those men chose to make all their crucial 
decisions at parlies of this kind; she knew that they did. She knew 
that behind the clattering, lumbering pretense of their council ses- 
sions, committee meetings and mass debates, the decisions wen. 
made in advance, in furtive informality, at luncheons, dinners and 
bars, the graver the issue, the more casual the method of settling it 
It was the first time that they had asked her. the outsider, the enemy, 
to one of those secret sessions: it was, she thought, an acknowledg- 
ment of the fact that they needed her and, perhaps the first step ol 
their surrender; it was a chance she could not leave unlaken. 

But as she sat in the candlelight ol the dining room, she felt certain 
that she had no chance, she felt restless!) unable to accept that cer- 
tainty, since she could not grasp its reason, yet lethargically reluctant 
to pursue any inquiry. 

“As, l think, you will concede. Miss Taggart, there now seems to 
be no economic justification for the continued existence of a railroad 
fine in Minnesota, which . . “And <$ven Miss Taggart will, I’m 
sure, agree that certain temporary retrenchments seem to be indi 
caled, until . . “Nobody, not even Miss Taggart, will deny that 
there are times when it is necessary to sacrifice the parts for the sake 
of the whole . . As she listened to the bicntions of her name tossed 
into the conversation at half-hour intervals, tossed perfunctorily, with 
the speaker’s eyes never glancing in tyer direction, she wondered 
what motive had made them want her fto be present. It was nof an 
attempt to delude her into believing th^t they were consulting her, 

864 



but worse: an attempt to delude themselves into believing that she 
had agreed. They asked her questions at times and interrupted her 
before she had completed the first sentence of the answer. They 
seemed to want her approval, without having to know whether she 
approved or not. 

Some crudely childish form of self-deception had made them 
choose to give to this occasion the decorous setting of a formal 
dinner, they acted as if they hoped to gain, from the objects of 
gracious luxury, the power and the honor ol which those objects had 
once been the product and symbol — they acted, she thought, like 
those savages who devour the corpse of an adversary in the hope of 
acquiring his strength and his virtue. 

She regretted that she was dressed as she was. ‘it's formal.” Jim 
had told her, “but don't overdo it . . . what 1 mean is, don’t look 
too rich . . . business people should avoid any appearance of arro- 
gance these days . . . not that you should look shabby, but if you 
could just seem to suggest . . , well, humility ... it would please 
them, you know, it would make them feel big.” “Really?” she had 
said, turning away. 

She wore a black dress that looked as if it were no more than a piece 
of cloth crossed over her breasts and falling to her feet in the soft folds 
of a Grecian tunic; it was made of satin, a satin so light and thin that it 
could have served as the stuff of a nightgown. 1 he luster of the doth, 
streaming and shifting with her movements, made it look as if the light 
ol the room she entered were her personal property, sensitively obedi- 
ent to the motions of her body, wrapping her in a sheet of radiance 
more luxurious than the texture of brocade, underscoiing the pliant 
fragility of her figure, giving her an air of so natural an elegance that it 
could afford to be scornfully casual She wore a single piece of jewelry, 
a diamond clip at the edge of the black neckline, that kept Hashing with 
the imperceptible motion of her breath, like a transformer converting 
a flicker into fire, making one conscious, not of the gems, but the living 
heat behind them; it flashed like a military decoration, like wealth worn 
as a badge of honor. She wore no othei ornament, only the sweep of a 
black velvet cape, mote arrogantly, ostentatiously patrician than any 
spread of sables. 

She regretted it now, as she looked at the men before her; she 
felt the embarrassing guilt of pointlessness, as if she had tried to 
defy the figures in a waxworks. She saw a mindless resentment in 
their eyes and a sneaking trace ot the lifeless, sexless, smutty leer 
with which men look at a poster advertising burlesque. 

“It’s a great responsibility/* said Eugene Lawson, “to hold the 
decision of life or death over thousands of people and to sacrifice 
them when necessary, but we must have the courage to do it.” His 
soft lips seemed to twist into a smile. 

“The only factors to consider are land acreage and population 
figures,” said Dr. Ferris in a statistical voice, blowing smoke rings at 
the ceiling. “Since it is no longer possible to maintain both the Min- 
nesota Line and the transcontinental traffic of this railroad, the 
choice is between Minnesota and those states west of the Rockies 
which were cut off by the failure of the Taggart Tunnel, as well as 

865 



the neighboring states of Montana, Idaho, Oregon, which means, 
practically speaking, the whole of the Northwest. When you compute 
the acreage and the number of heads in both areas, it's obvious 
that we should scuttle Minnesota rather than give up our lines of 
communication over a third of a continent.'’ 

“I won’t give up the continent," said Wesley Mouch, staring down 
at his dish of ice cream, his voice hurt and stubborn. 

She was thinking of the Mesabi Range, the last ot the major 
sources of iron ore, she was thinking of the Minnesota farmers, such 
as were left of them, the best producers of wheat in the country — 
she was thinking that the end ot Minnesota would end Wisconsin, 
then Michigan, then Illinois — she was seeing the red breath of the 
factories dying out over the industrial East — as against the empty 
miles of western sands, of straggly pastures and abandoned ranches. 

“The figures indicate," said Mr. Weatherby primly, “that the con- 
tinued maintenance of both areas seems to be impossible. The rail- 
way track and equipment of one has to be dismantled to provide 
the material for the maintenance of the other." 

She noticed that Clem Weatherby, their technical expert on rail- 
roads, was the inan of least influence among them, and Ouffy 
Meigs — of most. Cuffy Meigs sat sprawled in his chair, with a look 
of patronizing tolerance for their game of wasting time on discus- 
sions. He spoke little, but when he did, it was to snap decisively, 
with a contemptuous grin, “Pipe down. Jimmy 1 " or. “Nuts, Wes. 
you’re talking through your hat!" vSlie noticed that neither Jim nor 
Mouch resented it. They seemed to welcome the authority of his 
assurance; they were accepting him as their master. 

“We have to be practical," Dr. Ferris kept saying. “We have to 
be scientific." 

“I need the economy of the country as a whole," Wesley Mouch 
kept repealing. “I need the production of a nation." 

“Is it economics that you’re talking about? Is it production?" she 
said, whenever her cold, measured voice was able to seize a brief 
stretch of their time. “If it is, then give us leeway to save the Eastern 
states. That's all that’s left ot the country -and of the world. If you 
let us save that, we’ll have a chance to rebuild the rest. If not, it’s 
the end. Let the Atlantic Southern lake care of such transcontinental 
traffic as still exists. Let the local railroads take care ot the North- 
west. But let Taggart Transcontinental drop everything else — yes, 
everything— and devote all our resources, equipment and rad to the 
traffic of the Eastern states. Let us shrink back to the start of this 
country, but let us hold that start. We’ll run no trains west of the 
Missouri. We’ll become a local rail road-4- the local of the industrial 
East. Let us save our industries. There's: nothing left to save tn the 
West. You can run agriculture for centimes by manual labor and 
oxcarts. But destroy the last of this country’s industrial plant — and 
centuries of effort won’t be able to rebuild it or to gather the eco- 
nomic strength to make a start. How do ^ou expect our industries — 
or railroads-— to survive without steel? How do you expect any steel 
to be produced if you cut off the supply of iron ore? Save Minnesota, 
whatever’s left of it. The country? You bave no country to save, if 

866 



its industries perish. You can sacrifice a leg or an arm. You can’t 
save a body by sacrificing its heart and brain. Save our industries. 
Save Minnesota. Save the Eastern vSeaboard." 

It was no use. She said it as many times, with as many details, 
statistics, figures, proofs, as she could force out of her weary mind 
into their evasive hearing. It was no use. They neither refuted nor 
agreed; they merely looked as if her arguments were beside the 
point. There was a sound of hidden emphasis in their answers, as if 
they were giving her an explanation, but in a code to which she had 
no key. 

“There’s trouble in California," said Wesley Mouch sullenly. 
“Their slate legislatuie's been acting pretty huffy. Theic’s talk of 
seceding from the Union." 

“Oregon is overrun by gangs of deserters," said Clem Weatherby 
cautiously. “They murdered two tax collectors within the last three 
months " 

“The importance of industry to a civilization has been grossly over- 
emphasized," said Dr, Ferris dreamily “What is now known as the 
People’s State of India has existed for centuries without any indus- 
trial development whatever." 

“People could do with fewer material gadgets and a sterner disci- 
pline of privations," said Eugene Lawson eagerly. “It would be good 
lor them " 

“Oh hell, are you going to let that dame talk you into letting the 
nchest country on earth slip through your fingers?" said Cuffy Meigs, 
leaping to his feet. “It’s a fine time to give up a whole continent — 
and in exchange for what? For a dinky little state that’s milked dry, 
anyway! I say ditch Minnesota, but hold onto your transcontinental 
dragnet. With trouble and the riots everywhere, you won't be able 
to keep people in line unless you have transportation — troop trans- 
portation- unless you hold your soldiers within a few days’ journey 
of any point on the continent. This is no time to retrench. Don't get 
yellow, listening to all that talk. You've got the country m your 
packet. Just keep it there." 

“In the long run--" Mouch started uncertainly 

“In the long run, we’ll all be dead," snapped Cuffy Meigs. He was 
pacing restlessly. “Retrenching, hell! There's plenty of pickings left 
in California and Oregon and all those places. What I’ve been think- 
ing is, we ought to think of expanding — the way things are, there's 
nobody to stop us. it’s there tor the taking — Mexico, and Canada 
maybe — it ought to be a cinch." 

Then she saw the answer; she saw the secret premise behind their 
words With all of their noisy devotion to the age of science, their 
hysterically technological jargon, their cyclotrons, their sound rays, 
these men were moved forward, not by the image of an industrial 
skyline, but by the vision of that form of existence which the industri- 
alists had swept away — the vision of a fat, unhygienic rajah of India, 
with vacant eyes staring in indolent stupor out of stagnant layers of 
flesh, with nothing to do but run precious gems through his fingers 
and, once in a while, stick a knife into the body of a starved, toil- 
dazed, germ-eaten creature, as a claim to a tew grains of the crea- 

867 



ture’s rice, then claim it from hundreds of millions of such creatures 
and thus let the rice grains gather into gems. 

She had thought that industrial production was a value not to be 
questioned by anyone; she had thought that these men’s urge to 
expropriate the factories of others was their acknowledgment of the 
factories’ value. She, born of the industrial revolution, had not held 
as conceivable, had forgotten along with the tales of astrology and 
alchemy, what these men knew in their secret, furtive souls, knew 
not by means of thought, but by means of that nameless muck which 
they called their instincts and emotions; that so long as men struggle 
to stay alive, they’ll never produce so little but that the man with 
the club won’t be able to seize it and leave them still less, provided 
millions of them are willing to submit — that the harder their work 
and the less their gain, the more submissive the fiber of their spirit- 
that men who live by pulling levers at an electric switchboard, aie 
not easily ruled, but men who live by digging the soil with their 
naked fingers, are — that the feudal baron did not need electronic 
factories. in order to drink his brains away out of jeweled goblets, 
and neither did the rajahs of the People’s State of India. 

She saw what they wanted and to what goal theii “instincts,** 
which they called unaccountable, were leading them. She saw that 
Eugene Lawson, the humanitarian, took pleasure at the prospect of 
human starvation — and Dr. Ferris, the scientist, was dreaming of the 
day when men would return to the hand-plow. 

Incredulity and indifference were her only reaction: incredulity, 
because she could not conceive of what would bring human beings 
to such a state — indifference, because she could not regard those 
who reached it, as human any longer. They went on talking, but she 
was unable to speak or to listen. She caught herself feeling that her 
only desire was now to get home and tall asleep 

“Miss Taggart," said a politely rational, faintly anxious voice — and 
jerking her head up, she saw the courteous ligure of a waiter, “the 
assistant manager of the Taggart Terminal is on the telephone, re 
questing permission to speak to you at once. He says it’s an 
emergency. 

It was a relief to leap to her feet and get out of that room, even 
if in answer to the call of some new disaster. It was a relief to 
hear the assistant manager’s voice, even though it was saying, “The 
interlocker system is out. Miss Taggart. The signals are dead. There 
are eight incoming trams held up and six outgoing. We can’t move 
them in or out of the tunnels, wc can’t find the chief engineer, we 
can’t locate the breach in the circuit, we have no copper wire lor 
repairs, we don’t know what to do. we*-” ‘i’ll be right down," she 
said, dropping the receiver. 

Hurrying to the elevator, then half*runnmg through the stately 
lobby of the Wayne-Falkland, she felt IJerself returning to life at the 
summons of the possibility of action. 

Taxicabs were rare, these days, and bone came in answer to the 
doorman’s whistle. She started rapidly down the street, forgetting 
what she wore, wondering why the touch of the wind seemed too 
cold and too intimately close. 


868 



Her mind on the Terminal ahead, she was startled by the loveliness 
of a sudden sight: she saw the slender figure of a woman hurrying 
toward her, the ray of a lamppost sweeping over lustrous hair, naked 
arms, the swirl of a black cape and the flame of a diamond on her 
breast, with the long, empty corridor of a city street behind her and 
skyscrapers drawn by lonely dots of light. The knowledge that she 
was seeing her own reflection in the side mirror of a florist's window, 
came an instant too late: she had felt the enchantment of the full 
context to which that image and city belonged. ITien she felt a stab 
of desolate loneliness, much wider a loneliness than the span of an 
empty street — and a stab of anger at herself, at the preposterous 
contrast between her appearance and the context of this night and 
age. 

She saw a taxi turn a corner, she waved to it and leaped in, slam- 
ming the door against a feeling which she hoped to leave behind 
her. on the empty pavement by a florist’s window. But she knew — 
in self-mockery, in bitterness, in longing -that this feeling was the 
sense of expectation she had felt at her first ball and at those rare 
times when she had wanted the outward beauty of existence to match 
its inner splendor. What a time to think of it! she told herself m 
mockery— not now! she cried to herself in anger— but a desolate 
voice kept asking her quietly to the rattle of the taxi's wheels: You 
who believed you must live for your happiness, what do you now 
have left ol it what are you gaining from your struggle? — yes! say 
it honestly: what’s in it for you ’—or are you becoming one of those 
abject altruists who has no answer to that question any longer? . . . 
Not now’— she ordered, as the glowing entrance to the Taggart Ter- 
minal llaicd up m the rectangle of the taxi’s windshield 

The men m the Terminal managers office were like extinguished 
signals, us if here, too, a circuit were broken and there were no living 
current to make them move. They looked at her with a kind of 
inanimate passivity, as if it made no difference whether she let them 
slay still or threw a switch to set them m motion 

ihe Terminal manager was absent. The chief engineer could not 
he found; he had been seen at the Terminal two hours ago, not 
since. r Ihe assistant manager had exhausted his power of initiative 
by volunteering to call her. The others volunteered nothing. The 
signal engineer was a college-boyish man in his thirties, who kept 
saying aggressively, “But this has never happened before. Miss Tag- 
gart! The interlocker has never failed. It’s no! supposed to fail. We 
know our jobs, we can take care of it as will as anybody can — but 
not if it breaks down when it s not supposed to r She could not tell 
whether the dispatcher, an elderly man with years of railroad work 
behind him, still retained his intelligence but chose to hide it. or 
whether months of suppressing it had choked it for good, granting 
him the safety of stagnation 

u We don’t know what to do. Miss Taggart.” “We don’t know 
whom to call for what sort of permission. ' “ There are no rules to 
cover an emergency of this kind ‘ “ There aren’t even anv rules about 
who’s to lay down the rules for it!” 

She listened, she reached for the telephone without a word of 

m 



explanation* she ordered the operator to get her the operating vice- 
president of the Atlantic Southern in Chicago, to get him at his home 
and out of bed, if necessary. 

“George? Dagny Taggart,” she said, when the voice of her com- 
petitor came on the wire. “Will you lend me the signal engineer ol 
your Chicago terminal, Charles Murray, for twenty-four hours? . . . 
Yes . . . Right . . . Put him aboard a plane and get him here as fast 
as you can. Tell him we’ll pay three thousand dollars. . . . Yes, for 
the one day. ... Yes, as bad as that . . .Yes, I’ll pay him in cash, 
out of my own pocket; if necessary. I’ll pay whatever it takes to 
bribe his way aboard a plane, but get him on the first plane out ot 
Chicago . . . No, George, not one — not a single mind left on Taggart 
Transcontinental . . . Yes, I’ll get all the papers, exemptions, excep- 
tions and emergency permissions. . . Thanks, George. So long.” 

She hung up and spoke rapidly to the men before her, not to hear 
the stillness of the room and of the Terminal, where no sound of 
wheels was beating any longer, not to hear the bitter words which 
the stillness seemed to repeal: Not a single mind left on Taggart 
Transcontinental. 

‘ Get a wrecking train and crew ready at once,” she said. “Send 
them out on the Hudson Line, with orders to tear down every foot 
of copper wire, any copper wire, lights, signals, telephone, every thing 
that’s company property. Have it here by morning.” “But, Miss Tag- 
gart! Our service on the Hudson Line is only temporarily suspended 
and the Unification Board has refused us permission to dismantle 
the line!” “I’ll be responsible. ' “But how are we going to get the 
wrecking train out of here, when there aren't any signals?” “There 
will be signals in half an hour.” “How?" “C ome on.” she said, rising 
to her tcet. 

They followed her as she hurried down the passenger platforms, 
past the huddling, shifting groups of travelers by the motionless 
trains. She hurried down a narrow catwalk, through a ma/e of rail, 
past blinded signals and frozen switches, with nothing but the beat 
of her satin sandals to fill the great vaults of the underground tunnels 
of Taggart Transcontinental, with the hollow creaking of planks 
under the slower steps of men trailing her like a reluctant echo 
she hurried to the lighted glass tube of Tower A, that hung in the 
darkness like a crown without a body, the crown ot a deposed ruler 
above a realm ot empty tracks. 

The tower director was too expert a man at too exacting a job to 
be able wholly to conceal the dangerous burden of intelligence. He 
understood what she wanted him to do from her first few words and 
answered only with an abrupt “Yes. ma'am,” but he was bent over 
his charts by the time the others camd following her up the iron 
stairway, he was grimly at work on the npst humiliating job of calcu* 
lation he had ever had to perform in hisHong career. She knew how 
fully he understood it, from a single glance he threw at her, a glance 
of indignation and endurance that matched some emotion he had 
caught in her face. “Well do it first and feet about it afterwards,” 
she said, even though he had made no domment. “Yes, ma’am,” he 
answered wooden ly. 


870 



His room, on the top of an underground tower, was like a glass 
verandah overlooking what had once been the swiftest, richest and 
most orderly stream in the world- He had been trained to chart the 
course of over ninety trains an hour and to watch them roll safely 
through a maze of tracks and switches in and out of the Terminal, 
under his glass walls and his fingertips. Now, for the first time, he 
was looking out at the empty darkness of a dried channel. 

Through the open door of the relay room, she saw the tower men 
standing grimly idle — the men whose jobs had never permitted a 
moment's relaxation — standing by the long rows that looked like 
vertical copper pleats, like shelves of books and as much of a monu- 
ment to human intelligence. The pull of one of the small levers, 
which protruded like bookmarks from the shelves, threw thousands 
of electric circuits into motion, made thousands of contacts and 
broke as many others, set dozens of switches to clear a chosen course 
and dozens of signals to light it, with no erroi left possible, no 
chance, no contradiction— an enormous complexity ot thought con- 
densed into one movement of a human hand to set and insure the 
course of a train, that hundreds of trains might sately rush by. that 
thousands of tons of metal and lives might pass in speeding streaks, 
a breath away from one another, protected by nothing but a thought, 
ihe thought of the man who devised the levers. Bui they — she looked 
at the face of her signal engineer— -they believed that that muscular 
contraction of a hand was the only thing required to move the traf- 
fic — and now the tower men stood idle — and on the great panels in 
front of Ihe tower director, the red and green lights, which had 
Hashed announcing the progress of trains at a distance of miles, were 
now so many glass beads— like the glass beads for which another 
breed ol savages had once sold the island of Manhattan. 

“C 'all all of your unskilled laborers,” she said to the assistant man- 
ager. “the section hands, trackwalkers, engine wipers, whoever s in 
the Tciminal right now. and have them come here at once. ' 

"th'fv'" 

“Here,” she said, pointing at the tracks outside the tower “Call 
all your switchmen, too. Phone your storehouse and have them bring 
here every lantern they can lay their hands on. any sort of lantern, 
conductors' lanterns, storm lanterns, anything.” 

“ f.anterm , Miss Taggart?’' 

“Get. going,” 

“Yes, ma’am.” 

“What is it we're doing. Miss Taggart?” asked the dispatcher. 

“We're going to move trains and we're going to move them 
manually.” 

"Manually?" said the signal engineer. 

“Yes. brother! Now why should you be shocked?” She could not 
resist it. “Man is only muscles, isn’t he? We’re going back — back 
to where there were no interlocking systems, no semaphores, no 
electricity — back to the time when train signals were not steel and 
wire, but men holding lanterns. Physical men, serving as lampposts. 
You've advocated it long enough — you got what you wanted- Oh, 
you thought that your tools would determine your ideas? But it 

871 



happens to be the other way around — and now you’re going to see 
the kind of tools your ideas have determined!” 

But even to go back took an act of intelligence — she thought, 
feeling the paradox of her own position, as she looked at the lethargy 
of the faces around her. 

“How will we work the switches. Miss Taggart?” 

“By hand.” 

“And the signals?” 

“By hand.” 

“How?” 

“By placing a man with a lantern at every signal post.” 

“How? There’s not enough clearance.” 

“We’ll use alternate tracks.” 

“How will the men know which way to throw the switches.” 

“By written orders.” 

“Uh?” 

“By written orders— just as in the old days ” She pointed to the 
tower director. “He’s working out a schedule ot how to move the 
trains and which tracks to use. He'll write out an order for every 
signal and switch, he’ll pick some men as runners and they’ll keep 
delivering the orders to every post -and it will take hours to do 
what used to take minutes, but we ll get those waiting trains into the 
Terminal and out on the road.” 

“We’re to work it that way all night?” 

“And all day tomoi row— until the engineer who's got the brains 
for it, shows you how to repair the interlocker.” 

“There’s nothing in the union contracts about men standing with 
lanterns. Ill e re's going to he trouble. The union will object.” 

“Let them come to me ” 

“The Unification Board will object." 

“I'll be responsible ” 

“Well. 1 wouldn’t want to be held lor giving the orders 

“Til give the orders.” 

She stepped out on the landing of the iron stairway that hung on 
the side ot the tower; she was fighting for sell-control. It seemed to 
her for a moment as if she, loo, were a precision instrument ot hn:h 
technology, left wiLhout electric cunenl, trying to run a transconti 
nental railroad by means ol her two hands. She looked out at the 
great, silent darkness ot the Taggart underground — and she tell a 
stab of burning humiliation that she should now see it brought down 
to the level where human lampposts would stand m its tunnels as ii^ 
last memorial statues. 

She could barely distinguish the faces of the men when they gath- 
ered at the foot ot the tower. 1 hey came streaming silently ihiough 
the darkness and stood without moving Jn the bluish rnutk, with blue 
bulbs on the walls behind them and patches of light falling on thou 
shoulders from the tower’s windows. S|ie could see the greasy gar- 
ments, the slack, muscular bodies, the limply hanging arms of men 
drained by the unrewarding exhaustion! of a labor that required.no 
thought. These were the dregs of the railroad, the younger men who 
could now seek no chance to rise and the older men who had never 

872 



wanted to seek it. They stood in silence, not with the apprehensive 
curiosity of workmen, but with the heavy indifference of convicts. 

“lire orders which you are about to receive have come from me,” 
she said, standing above them on the iron stains, speaking with reso- 
nant clarity. “The men who’ll issue them are acting under my instruc- 
tions. The interlocking control system has broken down. It will now 
be replaced by human labor. Train service will be resumed at once.” 

She noticed some faces in the crowd staring at her with a peculiar 
look: with a veiled resentment and the kind of insolent curiosity that 
made her suddenly conscious of being a woman. Then she remem- 
bered whal she wore, and thought that it did look preposterous — 
and then, at the sudden stab of some violent impulse that felt like 
defiance and like loyalty to the full, real meaning of the moment, 
she threw her cape back and stood in the raw glare of light, under 
the sooted columns, like a figure at a formal reception, sternly erect, 
haunting the luxury of naked arms, of glowing black satin, ot a dia- 
mond flashing like a military cross. 

“The tower director will assign switchmen to their posts. He will 
select men for the job of signaling trains by means of lanterns and 
for the task of transmitting his orders. Trains will — ” 

She was fighting to drown a bitter voice that seemed to be saying: 
That’s all they’re fit for, these men. il even that . . . there’s not a 
single mind left anywhere on Taggart Transcontinental. . . . 

“Trains will continue to be moved in and out of the Terminal. 
You will remain at your posts unlil — ” 

Then she stopped. It was his eyes and hair that she saw first— the 
luthlessly perceptive eyes, the streaks of haii shaded from gold to 
topper that seemed to reflect the glow of sunlight in the murk of 
the underground - she saw John Galt among the chain gang of the 
mindless, John Galt in greasy overalls and rolled shirt sleeves, she 
saw his weightless way of standing, his face held lifted, his eyes 
looking at her as if he had seen this moment many moments ago. 

“What’s the matter. Miss Taggart *” 

It was the sott voice of the tower director, who stood by her side, 
with some sort of paper m his hand —and she thought it was strange 
to emerge from a span of unconsciousness which had been the span 
of the sharpest awareness she had ever experienced, only she did 
not know how long it had lasted or where she was or why. She had 
been aware of Gait’s face, she had been seeing, in the shape of his 
mouth, in the planes of his cheeks, the crackup of that implacable 
seienity which had always been his. but he still retained it in his 
look o! acknowledging the breach, ot admitting that this moment 
was loo much even for him. 

She knew that she went on speaking, because those around her 
looked as if they were listening, though she could not hear a sound, 
she went on speaking as if carrying out a hypnotic order given to 
herself some endless time ago, knowing only that the completion of 
that order was a form of defiance against him, neither knowing nor 
hearing her own words. 

She felt m if she were standing in a radiant silence where sight 
was her only capacity and his face was its only object, and the sight 

873 



of his face was like a speech in the form of a pressure at the base 
of her throat. It seemed so natural that he should be here, it seemed 
so unendurably simple — she felt as if the shock were not his pres- 
ence, but the presence of others on the tracks of her railroad, where 
he belonged and they did not. She was seeing those moments aboard 
a train when, at its plunge into the tunnels, she had felt a sudden, 
solemn tension, as if this place were showing her in naked simplicity 
the essence of her railroad and of her life, the union of consciousness 
and matter, the frozen form of a mind's ingenuity giving a physical 
existence to its purpose; she had felt a sense of sudden hope, as if 
this place held the meaning of all of her values, and a sense of secret 
excitement, as if a nameless promise were awaiting her under the 
ground — it was right that she should now meet him here, he had 
been the meaning and the promise — she was not seeing his clothing 
any longer, nor to what level her railroad had leduccd him — she was 
seeing only the vanishing torture of the months when he had been 
outside her reach — she was seeing in his face the confession of what 
those months had cost him — the only speech she heard was as if she 
were saying to him; Tins is the reward for all my days — and as if he 
were answering: For all of mine. 

She knew that she had finished speaking to the strangers when 
she saw that the lower director had stepped forward and was saying 
something to them, glancing at a list in his hand. Then, drawn by a 
sense ol irresistible certainty, she found herself descending the stairs, 
slipping away from the crowd, not toward the platforms and the exit, 
but into the darkness of the abandoned tunnels. You will follow me, 
she thought — and felt as if the thought were not m words, but in the 
tension of her muscles, the tension of her will to accomplish a thing 
she knew to be outside her power, vet she knew with certainty that 
it would be accomplished and by her wish . . . no, she thought, not 
by her wish, but by its total rightness. You will follow me —it was 
neither plea nor prayer nor demand, hut the quiet statement ol a 
fact, it contained the whole of her power of knowledge and the 
whole of the knowledge she had earned through the years. You will 
follow me, if we are what we are, you and 1, if we live, if the world 
exists, if you know the meaning of this moment and can’t let it slip 
by, as others let it slip, into the senselessness of the unwilled and 
unreached. You will follow me — she felt an exultant assurance, which 
was neither hope nor faith, but an act of worship for the logic of 
existence. 

She was hurrying down the remnants of abandoned rails, down 
the long, dark corridors twisting through granite. She lost the sound 
of the director’s voice behind her. Then she felt the beat of her 
arteries and heard, in answering rhythm, the beat of the city above 
her head, but she felt as if she heard th4 motion of her blood as a 
sound filling the silence, and the motion of the city as the beat inside 
her body — and, far behind her, she heatd the sound of steps. She 
did not glance back. She went faster. { 

She went past the locked iron door where the remnant of his 
motor was still hidden, she did not stop, |>ut a faint shudder was her 
answer to the sudden glimpse of the unity and logic in the events of 

874 



the last two years. A string of blue lights went on into the darkness, 
over patches of glistening granite, over broken sandbags spilling 
drifts on the rails, over rusty piles of scrap metal. When she heard 
the steps coming closer, she stopped and turned to look back. 

She saw a sweep of blue light flash briefly on the shining strands 
of Galt's hair, she caught the pale outline of his face and the dark 
hollows of his eyes. The face disappeared, but the sound of his steps 
served as the link lo the next blue light that swept across the line 
of his eyes, the eyes that remained held level, directed ahead — and 
she felt certain that she had stayed in his sight from the moment he 
had seen her at the tower. 

She heard the beat of the city above them — these tunnels, she had 
once thought, were the roots of the city and of all the motion reach- 
ing to the sky— but they, she thought, John Galt and she, were the 
living power within these roots, they were the start and aim and 
meaning— he, too, she thought, heard the beat of the city as the beat 
of his body. 

She threw her cape back, she stood defiantly straight, as he had 
seen her stand on the steps of the tower— as he had seen her for 
the first lime, ten years ago, here, under the ground — she was hearing 
the words of his confession, not as words, but by means of that 
heating which made it so difficult to breathe: You looked like a 
symbol of luxury and you belonged in the place that was its 
source . . . you seemed to bring the enjoyment of life back lo its 
rightful owners , . . you had a look of energy and of its reward, 
together . . . and 1 was the first man who had ever stated in what 
manner these two were inseparable. . . . 

The next span of moments was like flashes of light in stretches of 
blinded unconsciousness — the moment when she saw his face, as he 
stopped beside her. when she saw the unaslomshed calm, the leashed 
intensity, the laughter of understanding in the dark green eyes — the 
moment when she knew what he saw in hei face, by the tight, drawn 
harshness of his lips — the moment when she felt his mouth on hers, 
when she felt the shape of his mouth both as an absolute shape and 
as a liquid filling her body — then the motion of his lips down the 
line of her throat, a drinking motion that left a trail of bruises — 
then the sparkle of her diamond clip against the trembling copper 
ot his hair. 

Then she was conscious of nothing but the sensations of her body, 
because her body acquired the sudden power lo let her know her 
most complex values by direct perception. Just as her eyes had the 
power to translate wave lengths of energy into sight, just as her ears 
had the power to translate vibrations into sound, so her body now 
had the power to translate the energy that had moved all the choices 
of her life, into immediate sensory perception. It was not the pressure 
of a hand that made her tremble, but the instantaneous sum of its 
meaning, the knowledge that it was his hand, that it moved as if her 
flesh were his possession, that its movement was his signature of 
acceptance under the whole of that achievement which was herself— 
it was only a sensation of physical pleasure, but it, contained her, 
worship of him, of everything that was his person and his life — from 

875 



the night of the mass meeting in a factory in Wisconsin, to the Atlan- 
tis of a valley hidden in the Rocky Mountains, to the triumphant 
mockery of the green eyes of the superlative intelligence above a 
worker’s figure at the foot of the tower — it contained her pride in 
herself and that it should be she whom he had chosen as his mirror, 
that it should be her body which was now giving him the sum of his 
existence, as his body was giving her the sum of hers. These were 
the things it contained — but what she knew was only the sensation 
of the movement of his hand on her breasts. 

He tore off her cape and she felt the slenderness of her own body 
by means of the circle of his arms, as if his person were only a tool 
for her triumphant awareness of herself, but that self were only a 
tool for her awareness of him. It was as if she were reaching the 
limit of her capacity to feel, yet what she felt was like a cry of 
impatient demand, which she was now incapable of naming, except 
that it had the same quality of ambition as the course of her life, 
the same inexhaustible quality of radiant greed. 

He pulled her head back lor a moment, to look straight into her 
eyes, to let her see his, to let her know the full meaning of their 
actions, as if throwing I he spotlight of consciousness upon them for 
the meeting of their eyes in a moment of intimacy greater than the 
one to come. 

Then she felt the mesh of builap striking the skin of her shoulders, 
she found herself lying on the broken sandbags, she saw the long, 
tight gleam of her stockings, she felt his mouth piessed to her ankle, 
then rising in a tortured motion up the line of her leg, as if he wished 
to own its shape by means of his lips, then she felt her teeth sinking 
into the flesh of his arm. she felt the sweep of his elbow knocking 
her head aside and his mouth seizing her lips with a pressure more 
viciously painful than hers — then she felt, when it hit her throat, that 
which she knew only as an upward streak of motion that released 
and united her body into a single shock of pleasure— then she knew 
nothing but the motion of his body and the driving greed I hat went 
reaching on and on, as if she were not a person any longer, only a 
sensation of endless reaching for the impossible —then she knew that 
it was possible, and she gasped and lay still, knowing that nothing 
more could be desired, ever. 

He lay beside her, on his back, looking up at the darkness of the 
granite vault above them, she saw him stretched on the jagged slant 
of sandbags as if his body were fluid in relaxation, she saw the black 
wedge of her cape flung across the rails at their feet, there were 
beads of moisture twinkling on the vault, shifting slowly, running 
into invisible cracks, like the lights of ;t distant traffic. When he 
spoke, his voice sounded as if he were qujetly continuing a sentence 
in answer to the questions in her mind, a«j if he had nothing to hide 
from her any longer and what he owed h$r now was only the act of 
undressing his soul, as simply as he *vouk| have undressed his body. 

. . this is how I’ve watched you for; ten years . . , from here, 
from under the ground under your feet . . . knowing every move 
you made in your office at the top of the building, but never seeing 
you, never enough ... ten years of nights, spent waiting to catch a 

876 



glimpse of you, here, tin the platforms, when you boarded a train , - . 
Whenever the order came down to couple your car, I’d know of it 
and wait and see you come down the ramp, and wish you didn’t 
walk so fast ... it was so much like you. that walk. I’d know it 
anywhere . . . your walk and those legs of yours ... it was always 
your legs that I’d sec first, hurrying down the ramp, going past me 
as I looked up at you from a dark side track below. ... I think 1 
could have molded a sculpture of your legs, 1 knew them, not with 
my eyes, but with the palms of my hands when I watched you go 
by . . . when I turned back to my work . . . when 1 went home just 
before sunrise for the three hours of sleep which 1 didn’t get . . .” 

’i love you,’* she said, her voice quiet and almost toneless except 
for a fragile sound of youth. 

He closed his eyes, as if letting the sound travel through the years 
behind them. “Ten years, Dagny . . . except that once there were a 
lew weeks when 1 had you before me, in plain sight, within reach, 
not hurrying away, but held still, as on a lighted stage, a private 
stage for me to watch , . . and 1 watched you tor hours through 
many evenings ... in the lighted window of an office that was called 
the John Galt Line. . . . And one night — ” 

Her breath was a faint gasp. “Was it you, that night?” 

“Did you see me 9 ” 

“1 saw your shadow ... on the pavement . . . pacing back and 
forth ... it looked like a struggle ... it looked like — ” She stopped: 
she did not want to say “torture,” 

“It was,” he said quietly. ‘That night, I wanted to walk in, to face 
you, to speak, to . . . That was the night I came closest to breaking 
my oath, when I saw you slumped across your desk, when 1 saw you 
broken by the burden you were carrying-—” 

“John, that night, it was you that 1 was thinking ot . . only I 

didn’t know it . . .” 

“But, you see, / knew it." 

. . it was you, all my life, through everything 1 did and everything 
l wanted . . 

“I know it.” 

“John, the hardest was not when l left you in the valley ... it 
was — ” 

“Your radio speech, the day you returned?” 

“Yes! Were you listening?” 

“Of course. I’m glad you did it. It was a magnificent thing to do. 
And l — l knew it, anyway.” 

“You knew . . . about Hank Rearden?” 

“Before l saw you in the valley,” 

“Was it . . . when you learned about him, had you expected it?” 

“No.” 

“Was it . , . ?” She stopped. 

“Hard? Yes. But only for the first few days. That next night . - . 
Do you want me to tell you what I did the night after I learned it?” 

“Yes.” 

“I had never seen Hank Rearden, only pictures of him in the 
newspapers. I knew that he was in New York, that night, at some 

877 



conference of hig industrialists. I wanted to have just one look at 
him. I went to wait at the entrance of the hotel where that confer- 
ence was held. There were bright lights under the marquee of the 
entrance* but it was dark beyond, on the pavement, so I could see 
without being seen, there were a few loafers and vagrants hanging 
around, there was a drizzle of rain and we clung to the walls of the 
building. One could tell the members of the conference when they 
began filing out, by their clothes and their manner— ostentatiously 
prosperous clothes and a manner of ovei bearing timidity, as if they 
were guiltily trying to pretend that they were what they appeared to 
be for that moment. There were chauffeurs driving up their cars, 
there were a few reporters delaying them for questions and hangers- 
on trying to catch a word from them. They were worn men, those 
industrialists, aging, flabby, frantic with the effort to disguise uncer- 
tainty. And then I saw him. He wore an expensive trenchcoat and 
a hat slanting across his eyes. He walked swiftly, with the kind of 
assurance that has to be earned, as he’d earned it Some of his fellow 
industrialists pounced on him with questions, and those tycoons were 
acting like hangers-on around him. 1 caught a glimpse of him as he 
stood with his hand on the door of his car. his head lifted, I saw the 
brief flare of a smile under the slanting brim, a confident smile, 
impatient and a little amused. And then, lor one instant, l did what 
1 had never done before, what most men wreck their lives on doing- - 
I saw that moment out of context, I saw the world as he made it 
look, as if it matched him, as if he were its symbol — I saw a world 
of achievement, of unenslaved energy, of unobstructed drive through 
purposeful ) ears to the enjoyment of one’s reward -I saw, as I stood 
in the rain in a crowd of vagrants, what my years would have brought 
me, if that world had existed, and I felt a desperate longing — he was 
the image of everything I should have been . . . and he had every- 
thing that should have been mine. . . . But it was only a moment. 
Then I saw the scene in full context again and in all of its actual 
meaning— I saw what price he was paying for his brilliant ability, 
what torture he was enduring in silent bewilderment, struggling to 
understand what / had understood- -I saw that the world he sug- 
gested. did not exist and was yet to be made, f saw him again for 
what he was, the symbol of my battle, the unrewarded hero whom 
/ was to avenge and to release — and then . . . then I accepted what 
l had learned about you and him. I saw that it changed nothing, that 
1 should have expected it — that it was right. 1 ’ 

He heard the faint sound of her moan and he chuckled softly. 

“Dagny, it’s not that I don’t suffer, it’s that I know the unimpor- 
tance of suffering, I know that pain is to be fought and thrown aside, 
not to be accepted as part of one’s soul .'and as a permanent scar 
across one's view of existence. Don’t feeljsorry for me. It was gone 
right then.” 

She turned her head to look at him |n silence, and he smiled, 
lifting himself on an elbow to look do\yn at her face as she lay 
helplessly still. She whispered, “You’ve been a track laborer, here — 
here! — for twelve years , , 

“Yes.” 


878 



u Ever since—” 

“Ever since I quit the Twentieth Century.” 

“The night when you saw rne tor the first time . . . you were 
working here, then?” 

“Yes. And the morning when you offered to work for me as my 
cook, I was only your track laborer on leave of absence. Do you see 
why 1 laughed as l did?” 

She was looking up at his face; hers was a smile of pain, his — of 
pure gaiety. “John . . 

“Say it But say it all.” 

“You were here . . all those years , . 

“Yes.” 

“. . . all those years . . . while the railroad was perishing . . . while 
1 was searching for men of intelligence . . while I was struggling to 
hold on to any scrap ol it I could find ...” 

. . while you were combing the country tor the inventor of my 
motor, while you were feeding James Taggart and Wesley Mouch, 
while you were naming your best achievement after the enemy whom 
you wanted to destroy.” 

She closed her eyes 

“I was here all those years,” he said, “within your reach, inside 
your own realm, watching your struggle, your loneliness, your long- 
ing, watching you in a battle you thought you were fighting for me, 
a battle in which you were supporting my enemies and taking an 
endless defeat —I was here, hidden by nothing but an error of vour 
sight, as Atlantis is hidden from men by nothing but an optical illu- 
sion— I was here, waiting for the day when you would see. when you 
would know that by the code of the world you were supporting, it's 
to the darkest bottom of the underground that all the things you 
valued would have to be consigned and that it’s there that you would 
have to look. I was here. 1 was waiting for you. I love you, Dagny. 

1 love you more than my life. I who have taught men how life is to 
be loved. I've taught them also never to expect the unpaid for — and 
what I did tonight, 1 did it with full knowledge that I would pay tor 
it and that mv life might have to be the price.” 

“No!” 

He smiled, nodding. “Oh yes. You know that you’ve broken me 
lor once, that 1 broke the decision 1 had set for myself — but 1 did it 
consciously, knowing what it meant, 1 did it, not in blind surrender 
to the moment, but with full sight of the consequences and full will- 
ingness to bear them. 1 could not let this kind of moment pass us 
by, it was ours, my love, we had earned it. But you’re not ready to 
quit and join me — you don’t have to tell me, I know — and since l 
chose to take what I wanted before it was fully mine. I’ll have to 
pay for it, I have no way of knowing how or when, 1 know only that 
if l give in to an enemy. I’ll take the consequences.” He smiled in 
answer to the look on her face. “No, Dagny, you’re not my enemy 
in mind — and that is what brought me to this — but you are in fact, 
in the course you’re pursuing, though you don’t see it yet, but I do. 
My actual enemies are of no danger to me. You are. You’re the only 

879 



one who can lead them to find me. They would never have the 
capacity to know what I am, but with your help — they will.” 

“Nor 

“No, not by your intention. And you’re free to change your course, 
but so long as you follow it, you’re not free to escape its logic. Don’t 
frown, the choice was mine and it’s a danger 1 chose to accept. 1 am 
a trader, Dagny, in all things. I wanted you, 1 had no power to 
change your decision, I had only the power to consider the price 
and decide whether I could afford it. 1 could. My life is mine to spend 
or to invest — and you, you're” — as if his gesture were continuing his 
sentence, he raised her across his arm and kissed her mouth, while 
her body hung limply in surrender, her hair streaming down, her 
head falling back, held only by the pressure of his lips — “you’re the 
one reward 1 had to have and chose to buy. I wanted you, and if 
my life is the price. I’ll give it. My life — but not my mind.” 

There was a sudden glint of hardness in his eyes, as he sat up and 
smiled and asked, “Would you want me to join you and go to work - 
Would you like me to repair that interlocking signal system of yours 
within an hour?” 

“No!” The cry was immediate — in answer to the flash of a sudden 
image, the image of the men in the private dining room of the 
Wayne-Falkland. 

He laughed. “Why not?” 

“1 don't want to see you working as their serf’” 

“And yourself?” 

“1 think that they're crumbling and that I’ll win. I can stand it just 
a little longer.” 

“True, it’s just a little longer— not till you win. but till you learn " 

“I can’t let it go!” It was a cry of despair. 

“Not yet,” he said quietly. 

He got up, and she rose obediently, unable to speak. 

“I will remain here, on my job,” he said. “But don't try to see 
me. You’ll have to endure what I’ve endured and wanted to spare 
you — you’ll have to go on, knowing where I am, wanting me as I’ll 
want you, but never permitting yourself to approach me. Don’t seek 
me here. Don’t come to my home. Don’t ever let them see us to- 
gether. And w'hen you reach the end, when you’re ready to quit, 
don't tell them, just chalk a dollar sign on the pedestal of Nat Tag- 
gart’s statue — where it belongs — then go home and wait. I’ll come 
for you in twenty-four hours.” 

She inclined her head in silent promise. 

But when he turned to go, a sudden shudder ran through her 
body, like a first jolt of awakening or a Jast convulsion of life, and 
it ended in an involuntary cry: “Where i$re you going?” 

“To be a lamppost and stand holding^ lantern till dawn — which 
is the only work your world relegates mfi to and the only work it’s 
going to get” ■ 

She seized his arm, to hold him, to follow, to follow him blindly, 
abandoning everything but the sight of his face. “John!” 

He gripped her wrist, twisted her hand and threw it off. “No,” 
he said. 


880 



Then he took her hand and raised it to his lips and the pressure 
of his mouth was more passionate a statement than any he had 
chosen to confess. Then he walked away, down the vanishing line of 
rail, and it seemed to her that both the rail and the figure were 
abandoning her at the same time. 

When she staggered out into the concourse of the Terminal, the 
first blast of rolling wheels went shuddering through the walls of the 
building, like the sudden beat of a heart that had stopped. The tem- 
ple of Nathaniel Taggart was silent and empty, its changeless light 
beating down on a deserted stretch of marble. Some shabby figures 
shuffled across it, as if lost in its shining expanse. On the steps of 
the pedestal, under the statue of the austere, exultant figure, a ragged 
bum sat slumped in passive resignation, like a wing-plucked bird with 
no place to go, resting on any chance cornice. 

She fell down on the steps of the pedestal, like another derelict, 
her dust-smeared cape wrapped tightly about her, she sat still, her 
head oil her arm, past crying or feeling or moving. 

It seemed to her only that she kept seeing a figure with a raised 
arm holding a light, and it looked at times like the Statue of Liberty 
and then it looked like a man with sun-streaked hair, holding a 
lantern against a midnight sky, a red lantern that stopped the move- 
ment of the world. 

“Don’t take it to heart, lady, whatever it is,” said the bum. in a 
tone of exhausted compassion. “Nothing’s to be done about it, 
anyway. . . . What’s the use, lady'* Who is John Galt?'* 


Chapter V! THE CONCERTO OF DELIVERANCE 

On October 20. the steel workers' union ot Rearden Steel demanded 
a raise in wages. 

Hank Rearden learned it from the newspapers: no demand had 
been presented to him and it had not been considered necessary to 
inlorni him. The demand was made to the Unification Board; it was 
not explained why no other steel company was presented with a 
similar claim. He was unable to tell whether the demanders did or 
did not represent his workers, the Board’s rules on union elections 
having made it a matter impossible to define. He learned only that 
the group consisted of those newcomers whom the Board had slipped 
into his mills in the past few months. 

On October 23, the Unification Board rejected the union's peti- 
tion. ietusing to giant the raise. It any hearings had been held on the 
matter, Rearden had not known about it. He had not been consulted, 
informed 01 notified. He had waited, volunteering no questions. 

On October 25, the newspapers of the country, controlled by the 
same men who controlled the Board, began a campaign of commiser- 
ation with the workers of Rearden Steel. They printed stories about 
l he refusal of the wage raise, omitting any mention of who had re- 
fused it or who held the exclusive legal power to refuse, as if count- 
ing on the public to forget legal technicalities under a barrage of 
stories implying that an employer was the natural cause of all miser- 

881 



ies suffered by employees. They printed a story describing the hard- 
ships of the workers of Rearden Steel under the present rise in the 
cost of their living — next to a story describing Hank Rearden’s 
profits, of five years ago. They printed a story on the plight of a 
Rearden worker’s wife trudging from store to store in a hopeless 
quest for food — next to a story about a champagne bottle broken 
over somebody’s head at a drunken party given by an unnamed steel 
tycoon at a fashionable hotel: the steel tycoon had been Orren Boyle, 
but the story mentioned no names, inequalities still exist among 
us,” the newspapers were saying, “and cheat us of the benefits of 
our enlightened age.” “Privations have worn the nerves and temper 
of the people. The situation is reaching the danger point. We fear 
an outbreak of violence/’ “We fear an outbreak of violence,” the 
newspapers kept repeating. 

On October 28, a group of the new workeis at Rearden Steel 
attacked a foreman and knocked the tuyeres off a blast furnace. Two 
days later, a similar group broke the ground-floor windows of the 
administration building A new worker smashed the gears of a crane, 
upsetting a ladle of molten metal within a yard of five bystanders. 
“Guess I went nuts, worrying about my hungry kids/' he said, when 
arrested. “This is no time to theorize about who’s right or wrong,” 
the newspapers commented. “Our sole concern is the fact that an 
inflammatory situation is endangering the steel output of the 
country.” 

Rearden watched, asking no questions. He waited, as if some final 
knowledge were in the process of unraveling before him, a process 
not to be hastened or stopped. No — he thought through the early 
dusk of autumn evenings, looking out the window of his office — no. 
he was not indifferent to his mills; but the feeling which had once 
been passion for a living entity was now like the wistful tenderness 
one feels for the memory of the loved and dead. The special quality 
of what one feels for the dead, he thought, is that no action is possi 
ble any longer. 

On the morning of October 31, he received a notice informing 
him that all of his property, including his bank accounts and safety 
deposit boxes, had been attached to satisfy a delinquent judgment 
obtained against him in a trial involving a deficiency in his personal 
income tax of three years ago. It was a formal notice, complying 
with every requirement of the law — except that no such deficiency 
had ever existed and no such trial had ever taken place. 

“No,” he said to his indignation-choked attorney, “don’t question 
them, don’t answer, don't object.” “But this is fantastic!” “Any more 
fantastic than the rest?” “Hank, do you want me to do nothing? To 
take it lying down?” “No, standing up. Afid I mean, standing. Don’t 
move. Don’t act.” “But they’ve left you helpless.” “Have they?” he 
asked softly, smiling. * 

He had a few hundred dollars in cash,* left in his wallet, nothing 
else. But the odd, glowing warmth in hfc mind, like the feel of a 
distant handshake, was the thought that in a secret safe of his 
bedroom there lay a bar of solid gold, given to him by a gold- 
haired pirate. 


882 



Next day, on November 1, he received a telephone call from Wash- 
ington, from a bureaucrat whose voice seemed to come sliding down 
the wire on its knees in protestations of apology. “A mistake, Mr. 
Rearden! It was nothing but an unfortunate mistake! That attach- 
ment was not intended for you. You know how it is nowadays, with 
the inefficiency of all office help and with the amount of red tape 
we’re tangled in, some bungling fool mixed the records and pro- 
cessed the attachment order against you — when it wasn’t your case 
at all, it was, in fact, the case of a soap manufacturer! Please accept 
our apologies, Mr. Rearden, our deepest personal apologies at the 
top level.” The voice slid to a slight, expectant pause. “Mr. 
Rearden . . . ?” “I’m listening.” “1 can’t tell you how sorry we are 
to have caused you any embarrassment or inconvenience. And with 
all those damn formalities that we have to go through— you know 
how it is, red tape! — it will take a few days, perhaps a week, to 
deprocess that order and to lift the attachment . . . Mr. Rearden?” 
“I heard you.” “We’re desperately sorry and ready to make any 
amends within our power. You will, of course, be entitled to claim 
damages for any inconvenience this might cause you, and we are 
prepared to pay. We won’t contest it. You will, of course, file such 
a claim and — ” “I have not said that.” “Ub? No, you haven't . . . that 
is . . . well, what have you said, Mr. Rearden?” “1 have said nothing.” 

Late on the next afternoon, another voice came pleading from 
Washington. This one did not seem to slide, but to bounce on the 
telephone wire with the gay virtuosity of a tighl-rope walker. It intro- 
duced itself as Tinky Holloway and pleaded that Rearden attend a 
conference, “an informal little conference, just a lew of us, the top- 
level few.” to be held in New York, at the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, 
day after next. 

“There have been so many misunderstandings in the past few 
weeks!” said Tinky Holloway. “Such unfortunate misunderstandings^- 
and so unnecessary! We could straighten everything out in a jiffy, 
Mr. Rearden, if we had a chance to have a little talk with you. We're 
extremely anxious to see you.” 

“You can issue a subpoena for me any time you wish.” 

“Oh. no! no! no!” The voice sounded frightened. “No, Mr. Rear- 
den — why think of such things? You don’t understand us, we’re anx- 
ious to meet you on a friendly basis, we’re seeking nothing but your 
voluntary co-operation.” Holloway paused tensely, wondering 
whether he had heard the faint sound of a distant chuckle; he waited, 
but heard nothing else. “Mr. Rearden?” 

“Yes?” 

“Surely, Mr. Rearden, at a time like this, a conference with us 
could be to your great advantage.” 

“A conference — about what?” 

“You’ve encountered so many difficulties — and we're anxious to 
help you in any way we can.” 

“I have not asked for help.” 

“These are precarious times, Mr. Rearden, the public mood is so 
uncertain and inflammatory, so . . . dangerous . . . and we want to 
be able to protect you.” 


883 



“I have not asked for protection.'' 

“But surely you realize that we’re in a position to be of value to 
you, and if there's anything you want from us, any ...” 

“There isn't,” 

“But you must have problems you’d like to discuss with us.” 

“I haven't.” 

“Then . . . well, then” — giving up the attempt at the play of grant- 
ing a favor, Holloway switched to an open plea— “then won t you 
just give us a hearing?” 

“If you have anything to say to me.” 

“We have, Mr. Rearden. we certainly have! That's all weTe asking 
for — a hearing. Just give us a chance. Just come to this conference. 
You wouldn’t be committing yourself to anything — " He said it invol- 
untarily. and stopped, hearing a bright, mocking stab of life in Rear- 
den’s voice, an unpromising sound, as Rearden answered: 

“1 know it.” 

“Well, 1 mean . . . that is . well, then, will you come?” 

“All right,” said Rearden. “I’ll come.” 

He did not listen to Holloway’s assurances of gratitude, he noted 
only that Holloway kept repeating. “At seven p.m, November fourth, 
Mr. Rearden . . . November fourth . . .” as if the date had some 
special significance. 

Rearden dropped the receiver and lay back in his chair, looking 
at the glow of furnace flames on the ceiling ol his office He knew 
that the conference was a trap: he knew also that he was walking 
into it with nothing for any trappers to gam. 

Tinky Holloway dropped the receiver, in his Washington office, 
and sat up tensely, frowning. Claude Slagenhop, president of Friends 
of Global Progress, who had sat in an armchair, nervously chewing 
a matchstick, glanced up at him and asked, “Not so good?” 

Holloway shook his head. “He’ll come, but . . no, not so good ” 
He added, “1 don’t think he’ll take it.” 

“That’s what my punk told me.” 

“I know.” 

“The punk said we’d better not try it.” 

“God damn your punk! We’ve got to! Well have to risk it!” 

The punk was Philip Rearden who, weeks ago, had reported to 
Claude Slagenhop: “No, he won’t let me in, he won’t give me a job. 
I've tried, as you wanted me to. I've tried niy best, but it’s no use, 
he won’t let me set foot inside his mills And as to his frame of 
mind — listen, it’s bad. It’s worse than anything 1 expected I know 
him and I can tell you that you won’t have a chance. He’s pretty 
much at the end of his rope. One more squeeze will snap it. You 
said the big boys wanted to know. Tell the$n not to do it. Tell them 
he . . . Claude, God help us, if they do itJthey’U lose him!” “Well, 
you’re not of much help,” Slagenhop hadj&aid dryly, turning away. 
Philip had seized his sleeve and asked, his- voice shrinking suddenly 
into open anxiety, “Say, Claude . . . according to . . . to Directive 
10-289 ... if he goes, there's . . . there’s to be no heirs?” “That’S 
right.” “They'd seize the mills and , . and everything?” “That’s the 
law.” “But . . . Claude, they wouldn’t do fhat to me, would they?” 

884 



“They don’t want him to go. You know that Hold him, if you can.” 
“But 1 can’ll You know I can’t! Because of my political ideas and . . . 
and everything I’ve done for you, you know what he thinks of me! 

I have no hold on him at all!” “Well, that’s your tough luck.” 
“Gaude!” Philip had cried in panic. “Claude, they won’t leave me 
out in the cold, will they? 1 belong, don’t 1? They’ve always said I 
belonged, they’ve always said they needed me . . . they said they 
needed men like me, not like him, men with my . . . my sort of 
spirit, remember? And after all I’ve done for them, after all my faith 
and service and loyalty to the cause — ” “You damn fool,” Slagenhop 
had snapped, “of what use are you to us without himV ’ 

On the morning of November 4, Hank Rearden was awakened by 
the ringing of the telephone. He opened his eyes to the sight of a 
dear, pale sky, the sky of early dawn, in the windows of his bedroom, 
a sky the delicate color of aquamarine, with the first rays of an 
invisible sun giving a shade of porcelain pink to Philadelphia’s an- 
cient roof tops. For a moment, while his consciousness had a purity 
to equal the sky’s, while he was aware ot nothing but himself and 
had not yet reharncssed his soul to the burden of alien memories, 
he lay still, held by the sight and by the enchantment of a world to 
match it, a world where the style of existence would be a continu- 
ous morning. 

The telephone threw him back into exile - it was screaming at 
spaced intervals, like a nagging, chronic cry for help, the kind of cry 
that did not belong in his world He lifted the receiver, frowning. 
“Hello?” 

“Good morning, Henry.” said a quavering voice; it was his mother. 

“Mother — at this hour?” he asked dryly. 

“Oh, you’re always up at dawn, and I wanted to catch you before 
you went to the office.” 

“Yes? What is it?” 

“I’ve got to see you. Henry, I've got to speak to you. Today. 
Sometime today. It’s important.” 

“Has anything happened?” 

“No . . . yes . . . that is . . . I’ve got to have a talk with you in 
person. Will you come?” 

“Fm sorry, I can’t. I have an appointment in New York tonight. 
If you want me to come tomorrow — ’’ 

“No! No, not tomorrow. It's got to be today. It’s got to.” There 
was a dim tone of panic in her voice, but it was the stale panic of 
chronic helplessness, not the sound ot an emergency — except for an 
odd echo of fear in her mechanical insistence. 

“What is it. Mother?” 

“1 can’t talk about it over the telephone. I’ve got to see you.” 

“Then if you wish to come to the office — ” 

“No! Not at the office! I’ve got to see you alone, where we can 
talk. Can’t you come here today, as a favor? It’s your mother who’s 
asking you a favor. You’ve never come to see us at all. And maybe 
you’re not the one to blame for it, either. But can’t you do it for 
me this once, if I beg you to?” 

“AH right. Mother. I’ll be there at four o’clock this afternoon.” 

885 



“That will foe fine, Henry, Thank you, Henry. That will foe fine." 

It seemed to him that there was a touch of tension in the air of 
the mills, that day. It was a touch too slight to define — hut the mills, 
to him, were like the face of a loved wife where he could catch 
shades of feeling almost ahead of expression. He noticed small clus- 
ters of the new workers, just three or four of them huddling together 
in conversation — once or twice too often He noticed their manner, 
a manner suggesting a poolroom corner, not a factory. He noticed 
a few glances thrown at him as he went by, glances a shade too 
pointed and lingering. He dismissed it: it was not quite enough to 
wonder about — and he had no time to wonder 

When he drove up to his former home, that afternoon, he stopped 
his air abruptly at the foot of the hill. He had not seen the house 
since that May 15, six months ago. when he had walked out of it— 
and the sight brought back to him the sum of all he had felt in ten 
years of daily home-coming: the strain, the bewilderment, the gray 
weight of unconfessed unhappiness, the stern endurance that forbade 
him to confess it. the desperate innocence of the effort to understand 
his family . . the effort to be just 

He walked slowly up the path toward the door. He felt no emo- 
tion, only the sense of a great, solemn clarity. He knew that this 
house was a monument of guilt— of his guilt toward himself 

He had expected to see his mother and Philip; he had not expected 
the third person who rose, as they did, at his entrance into the living 
room: it was Lillian 

He stopped on the threshold. They stood looking at his face and 
at the open door behind him. Their faces had a look of fear and 
cunning, the look of that blackmail-through virtue which he had 
learned to understand, as if they hoped to get away wilh it by means 
of nothing but his pity, to hold him trapped, when a single step back 
could take him out ot their reach. 

They had counted on his pity and dreaded his anger; they had not 
dared consider the third alternative: his indifference 

“What is she doing here?" he asked, turning to his mother, his 
voice dispassionately flat. 

“Lillian’s been living here ever since your divorce," she answered 
defensively. “I couldn’t let her starve on the city pavements, could 
i?" 

The look m his mother's eyes was halt-plea, as if she were begging 
him not to slap her face, half-triumph, as if she had slapped his. He 
knew her motive: it was not compassion, there had never been much 
love between Lillian and her, it was their common revenge against 
him, it was the secret satisfaction of spending his money on the ex- 
wife he had refused to support 

Lillian’s head was poised to bow in greeting, with the tentative 
hint of a smile on her lips, half-timid, half^brash. He did not pretend 
to ignore her; he looked at her, as if he ^were seeing her fully, yet 
as if no presence were being registered in his mind. He said nothing, 
closed the door and stepped into the room. 

His mother gave a small sigh of uneasy relief and dropped hastily 

m . 



into the nearest chair, watching hint, nervously uncertain of whether 
he would follow her example. 

"What was it you wanted?” he asked, sitting down. 

His mother sat erect and oddly hunched, her shoulders raised, her 
head half-lowered. "Mercy. Henry.” she whispered. 

"What do you mean?” 

"Don’t you understand me?” 

"No.” 

"Well” — she spread her hands in an untidily fluttering gesture of 
helplessness — "Well . . .” Her eyes darted about, struggling to escape 
his attentive glance. "Well, there are so many things to say and . , 
and I don’t know how to say them, but . . . well, there’s one practical 
matter, but it’s not important hv itself it's not why 1 called 
you here . 

"What is it?” 

"The practical matter? Our allowance checks™ -Philip’s and mine. 
It’s the first of the month, but on account of that attachment order, 
the checks couldn’t come through. You know that, don't you?” 

"I know it.” 

"Well, what are we going to do?” 

"1 don’t know.” 

"I mean, what are you going to do about it?” 

"Nothing ” 

Hjs mother sat staring at him, as it counting the seconds of silence. 

Nothing, Henry?" 

"1 have no power to do anything ” 

They were watching his face with a kind of searching intensity: he 
(elt certain that hts mothei had told him the truth, that immediate 
financial worry was not their purpose, that it was only the symbol 
of a much wider issue. 

"But, Henry, we’re caught short.” 

"So was I.” 

"But can't you send us some cash or something*" 

"They gave me no warning, no tune to get any cash.” 

‘Then . . . Look, Henry, the thing was so unexpected, it scared 
people. 1 guess -ihe grocery store refuses to give us credit, unless 
vou ask tor it. I think they want vou to sign a credit card or some- 
thing. So will you speak to them and arrange it?” 

"1 will not." 

"You won’t?" She choked on a small gasp. "Why?” 

"1 will not assume obligations that 1 can t fulfill.” 

"What do you mean?” 

"I will not assume debts 1 have no way of repaying.” 

‘What do you mean, no way? JTiat attachment is only some sort 
of technicality, it's only temporary, everybody knows that!” 

"Do they? I don’t.” 

"But, Henry — a grocery bill! You’re not sure you'll be able to pay 
a grocery bill, you, with all the millions you own?” 

T’m not going to defraud the grocer by pretending that I own 
those millions.’* 

"What are you talking about? Who owns them?” 

887 



“Nobody.” 

“What do you mean?” 

. “Mother* I think you understand me fully. I think you understood 
it before I did. There isn’t any ownership left in existence or any 
property. It's what you approved of and believed in for years. You 
wanted me tied. I’m tied. Now it’s too late to play any games 
about it.” 

“Are you going to let some political ideas of yours — ” She saw 
the look on his face and stopped abruptly. 

Lillian sat looking down at the floor, as if afraid to glance up at 
this moment. Philip sat cracking his knuckles. 

His mother dragged her eyes into focus again and whispered, 
“Don’t abandon us, Henry.” Some faint stab of life in her voice told 
him that the lid of her real purpose was cracking open. “These are 
terrible times, and we’re scared. That's the truth of it, Henry, we’re 
scared, because you’re turning away from us. Oh, I don't mean just 
that grocery bill, but that’s a sign — a year ago you wouldn't have let 
that happen to us. Now . . . now you don't care.” She made an 
expectant pause. “Do you?” 

“No.” 

“Well . . . well, 1 guess the blame is ours. That’s what 1 wanted 
to tell you— that we know we’re to blame. We haven’t treated you 
right, all these years We've been unfair to you. we've made you 
suffer, we’ve used you and given you no thanks in return. We’re 
guilty, Henry, we’ve sinned against you, and wc confess it. What 
more can we say to you now? Will you find it in your heait to 
forgive us?” 

“What is it you want me to do?” he asked, in the dear, flat tone 
of a business conference. 

“I don’t know! Who am I to know? But that’s not what I’m talking 
of right now. Not of doing , only of feeling. It’s your feeling that I’m 
begging you for, Henry — just your feeling — even if we don’t deserve 
it. You’re generous and strong. Will you cancel the past, Henry? 
Will you forgive us f> ” 

The look of terror in her eyes was real. A year ago. he would 
have told himself that this was her way of making amends; he would 
have choked his revulsion against her words, words which conveyed 
nothing to him but the fog of the meaningless; he would have vio- 
lated his mind to give them meaning, even if he did not understand; 
he would have ascribed to her the virtue of sincerity in her own 
terms, even if they were not his. But he was through with granting 
respect to any terms other than his own. 

“Will you forgive us?” 

“Mother, it would be best not to speal^ of that. Don’t press me 
to tell you why. I think you know it a,4 well as 1 do. If there’s 
anything you want done, tell me what i^ is. There’s nothing else 
to discuss.” t 

“But I don't understand you! f don’t! That’s what l called you 
here for — to ask your forgiveness! Are you going to refuse to an- 
swer me?” 

“Very well. What would it mean, my forgiveness?” 

888 - 



“Uh?” 

“I said, what would it mean?” 

She spread her hands out in an astonished gesture to indicate the 
self-evident. “Why, it ... it would make us feel better.” 

“Will it change the past?” 

“It would make us feel better to know that you’ve forgiven it.” 

“Do you wish me to pretend that the past has not existed?” 

“Oh God, Henry, can’t you see? All we want is only to know that 
you . . . that you feel some concern for us.” 

“I don’t feel it. Do you wish me to fake it'*” 

“But that’s what I’m begging you for — to jeel it!” 

“On what ground?” 

“Ground?” 

“In exchange for what?” 

“Henry, Henry, it’s not business we’re talking about, not steel 
tonnages and bank balances, it's feelings— and you talk like a 
trader!” 

“I am one.” 

What he saw in her eyes was terror — not the helpless terror of 
struggling and failing to understand, but the terror of being pushed 
toward the edge where to avoid understanding would no longer be 
possible. 

“Look. Henry,” said Philip hastily. “Mother can’t understand 
those things. We don’t know how to approach you We can’t speak 
your language.” 

“f don’t speak youis ” 

“What she’s trying to say is that we’re sorry We’re terribly sorry 
that we've hurt you. You think we're not paying tor it. but we are. 
We're suffering remorse.” 

The pain m Philip's face was real. A year ago, Reardon would 
have felt pity. Now. he knew' that they had held him through nothing 
but his reluctance to hurt them, his fear of their pain. He was not 
afraid of it any longer. 

“We’re soriy, Henry. We know we’ve harmed you. We wish we 
could atone for it. But what can wc do? The past is past. We can’t 
undo it.” 

“Neither can l.” 

“You can accept our repentance,” said Lillian, in a voice glassy 
with caution. “I have nothing to gain from you now. 1 only want you 
to know that whatever I’ve done, Lve done it because l loved you.” 

He turned away, without answering. 

“Henry!” cried his mother. “What’s happened to you? What's 
changed you like that? You don’t seem to be human any more! You 
keep pressing us for answers, when we haven’t any answers to give. 
You keep beating us with logic — what’s logic at a time like this? — 
what’s logic when people are suffering?*’ 

“We can’t help it!” cried Philip. 

“We’re at your mercy,” said Lillian. 

They were throwing their pleas at a face that could not be reached. 
They did not know — and their panic was the last of their struggle to 
escape the knowledge — that his merciless sense of justice, which had 

889 



been their only hold on him, which had made him take any punish- 
ment and give them the benefit of every doubt, was now turned 
against them— that the same force that had made him tolerant, was 
now the force that made him ruthless — that the justice which would 
forgive miles of innocent errors of knowledge, would not forgive a 
single step taken in conscious evil. 

“Henry, don’t you understand us?" his mother was pleading. 

“I do,” he said quietly. 

She looked away, avoiding the clarity of his eyes. “Don’t you care 
what becomes of us?" 

“I don't," 

"Aren't you human?" Her voice grew shrill with anger. "Aren’t 
you capable of any love at all? It's your heart I'm trying to reach, 
not your mind! Love is not something to argue and reason and bar- 
gain about! It s something to give! To feel! Oh God, Henry can't 
you teel without thinking?" 

"1 never have." 

In a moment, her voice came back, low and dioning: "We’re not 
as smart as you are. not as strong. If we’ve sinned and blundered, 
it’s because we're helpless. We need you, you’re all we've got — and 
we’re losing you — and we’re afraid. These are terrible times, and 
getting worse, people are scared to death, scared and blind and not 
knowing what to do. How are we to cope with it, if you leave us 1 ’ 
We’re small and weak and we'll be swept like driftfeood m that 
terror that’s running loose in the world. Maybe we had our share ol 
guilt for it, maybe we helped to bring it about, not knowing any 
better, but what’s done is done— and we can't stop it now It you 
abandon us, we're lost. If you give up and vanish, like all those men 
who — 

It was not a sound that stopped her, it was only a movement ol 
his eyebrows, the brief, swift movement of a check mark. Then they 
saw r him smile; the nature of the smile was the most terrifying ol 
answers. 

"So that's what you’re afraid of," he said slowly. 

"You can’t quit!" his mother screamed in blind panic. "You can't 
quit now! You could have, fast year, but not now! Not today! You 
can’t turn deserter, because now they take it out on your family! 
They’ll leave us penniless, they'll sei/e everything, they’ll leave us 
to starve, they'll — " 

"Keep still!" cried Lillian, more adept than the others at reading 
danger signs in Rearden's face. 

His face held the remnant of a smile, add they knew that he was 
not seeing them any longer, but it was ndjt in their power to know 
why his smile now vseemed to hold pain and|an almost wistful longing, 
or why he was looking across the room.* at the niche of the far- 
thest window. 

He was seeing a finely sculptured face held composed under the 
lashing of his insults, he was hearing a v^ice that had said to him- 
quietly, here, in this room: "It is against die sin of forgiveness that 
I wanted to warn you," You who had known it them he thought . . 
but he did not (hush the sentence in his mind, he let it end in the 

890 



bitter twist of his smile, because he knew what he had been about 
to think: You who had known it then — forgive me. 

There it was— he thought, looking at his family— the nature of 
their pleas for mercy, the logic of those feelings they so righteously 
proclaimed as non-logical — there was the simple, brutal essence of 
all men who speak of being able to feel without thought and of 
placing mercy over justice. 

They had known what to fear; they had grasped and named, before 
he had, the only way of deliverance left open to him; they had under- 
stood the hopelessness of his industrial position, the futility of his 
struggle, the impossible burdens descending to crush him; they had 
known that in reason, in justice, in sell-preservation, his only course 
was to drop it all and run— yet they wanted to hold him, to keep 
him in the sacrificial furnace, to make him let them devour the last 
of him in the name of mercy, forgiveness and broiher-canmbal love. 

"If you still want me to explain it, Mother,*' he said very quietly, 
“il you’re still hoping that I won't be cruel enough to name what 
vou’re pretending not to know, then here's what's wrong with your 
idea of forgiveness: You regret that you've huit me and, as your 
atonement for it, you ask that 1 offei myself to total immolation.” 

“Logic!” she screamed. "There you go again with your damn logic! 
ft’s pity that we need, pity, not logic 1 ” 

He rose to his teet. 

‘Wait! Don’t go! Henry, don’t abandon us! Don’t sentence us to 
perish! Whatever we arc, we're human! We want to live!” 

"Why. no--” he started in quiet astonishment and ended in quiet 
hoiror, as the thought struck him fully . "I don't think you do. If you 
did, you would have known how to value me ” 

As if in silent proof and answer, Philip’s lace went slowly into an 
expression intended as a smile of amusement, yet holding nothing 
but fear and malice. “You won't be able to quit and run away.” said 
Philip. “You can’t run away without money.” 

It seemed to strike its goal. Rearden stopped short, then chuckled. 
" Thanks, Philip.” he said. 

”Uh?” Philip gave a nervous jerk of bewilderment. 

“So that’s the purpose of the attachment order. That's what your 
friends are afraid of. J knew they were getting set to spring some- 
thing on me today. 1 didn’t know that the attachment was their idea 
ot cutting off escape.” He turned incredulously to look at his mother. 
"And that's why you had to see me today / before the conference in 
New York.” 

‘Mother didn’t know it 1 ” cried Philip, then caught himself and 
cried louder. “1 don't know what you’re talking about! I haven’t said 
anything! I haven't said it!” His fear now seemed to have some much 
less mystic and much more practical quality. 

’Don’t worry, you poor little louse, l won't tell them that you've 
told me anything. And if you were trying—” 

He did not finish; he looked at the three faces before him, and a 
sudden smile ended his sentence, a smile of weariness, of pity, of 
incredulous revulsion. He was seeing the final contradiction, the gro- 
tesque absurdity at the end of the irrationahsls’ game; the men in 

891 



Washington had hoped to hold him by prompting these three to try 
for the role of hostages. 

“You think you're so good, don’t you?” It was a sudden cry and 
it came from Lillian; she had leaped to her feet to bar his exit; her 
face was distorted, as he had seen it once before, on that morning 
when she had learned the name of his mistress. “You’re so good! 
You’re so proud of yourself! Well, / have something to tell you!” 

She looked as if she had not believed until this moment that her 
game was lost. The sight of her face struck him like a last shred 
completing a circuit, and in sudden clarity he knew what her game 
had been and why she had married him. 

If to choose a person as the constant center of one’s concern, as 
the focus of one’s view of life, was to love — he thought — then it was 
true that she loved him; but if, to him, love was a celebration of 
one’s self and of existence — then, to the self-haters and life-haters, 
the pursuit of destruction was the only form and equivalent of love. 
It was for the best of his virtues that Lillian had chosen him, for his 
strength, his confidence, his pride — she had chosen him as one 
chooses an object of love, as the symbol of man’s living power, but 
the destruction of that power had been her goal. 

Fie saw them as they had been at their first meeting: he, the man 
of violent energy and passionate ambition, the man of achievement, 
lighted by the flame of his success and flung into the midst of those 
pretentious ashes who called themselves an intellectual elite, the 
burned-out remnants of undigested culture, feeding on the afterglow 
of the minds of others, offering their denial of the mind as their only 
claim to distinction, and a craving to control the world as their only 
lust — she, the woman hanger-on of that elite, wearing their shopworn 
sneer as her answer to the universe, holding impotence as superiority 
and emptiness as virtue — he. unaware of their hatred, innocently 
scornful of their posturing fraud — she, seeing him as the danger to 
their world, as a threat, as a challenge, as a reproach. 

The lust that drives others to enslave an empire, had become, in 
her limits, a passion for power over him. She had set out to break 
him, as if, unable to equal his value, she could surpass it by destroy- 
ing it, as if the measure of his greatness would thus become the 
measure of hers, as if— he thought with a shudder — as if the vandal 
who smashed a statue were greater than the artist who had made it, 
as if the murderer who killed a child were greater than the mother 
who had given it birth. 

He remembered her hammering derision of his work, his mills, his 
Metal, his success, he remembered her desire to see him drunk, just 
once, her attempts to push him into infidelity, her pleasure at the 
thought that he had fallen to the level of some sordid romance, her 
terror on discovering that that romance h|ad been an attainment, not 
a degradation. Her line of attack, whiclf he had found so baffling, 
had been constant and dear — it was his jself-esteem she had sought 
to destroy, knowing that a man who surrenders his value is at the 
mercy of anyone’s will; it was his moral purity she had struggled to 
breach, it was his confident rectitude she had wanted to shatter by 

892 



means of the poison of guilt— as if, were he to collapse, his depravity 
would give her a right to hers. 

For the same purpose and motive, for the same satisfaction, as 
others weave complex systems of philosophy to destroy generations, 
or establish dictatorships to destroy a country, so she, possessing no 
weapons except femininity, had made it her goal to destroy one man. 

Yours was the axle of life — he remembered the voice of his lost 
young teacher — what, then, is theirs? 

“I have something to tell you!” cried Lillian, with the sound of 
that impotent rage which wishes that words were brass knuckles. 
“You’re so proud of yourself, aren’t you? You’re so proud of your 
name! 'Rearden Steel, Rearden Metal, Rearden Wife! That’s what f 
was, wasn’t 1? Mrs. Rearden! Mrs. Henry Rearden!” The sounds she 
was making were now a string of cackling gasps, an unrecognizable 
corruption of laughter. “Well, l think you’d like to know that your 
wife’s been laid by another man! I’ve been unfaithful to you, do you 
hear me? I’ve been unfaithful, not with some great, noble lover, but 
with the scummiest louse, with Jim Taggart! Three months ago! Be- 
fore your divorce! While I was your wife! While 1 was still your 
wife!” 

He stood listening like a scientist studying a subject of no personal 
relevance whatever. There, he thought, was the final abortion of the 
creed ot collective interdependence , the creed o( non-identity, non- 
property, non-fact: the belief that the moral stature of one is at the 
mercy of the action of another 

“I’ve been unfaithful to you! Don't you hear me, you stainless 
Puritan? l*vc slept with Jim Taggart, you incorruptible hero! Don't 
you hear me? . . . Don't you hear me? . . - Don’t you . . . ?” 

He was looking at her as he would have looked if a strange woman 
had approached him on the street with a personal confession — a look 
like the equivalent of the words: Why tell it to me? 

Her voice trailed off. He had not known what the destruction of 
a person would be like; but he knew that he was seeing the destruc- 
tion of Lillian He saw it in the collapse of her face, in the sudden 
slackening of features, as if there were nothing to hold them to- 
gether, in the eyes, blind, yet staring, staring inward, filled with that 
terror which no outer threat can equal. It was not the look of a 
person losing her mind, but the look of a mind seeing total defeat 
and, in the same instant, seeing her own nature for the first time— 
the look of a person seeing that after years of preaching non- 
existence, she had achieved it. 

He turned to go. His mother stopped him at the door, seizing his 
arm. With a kx>k of stubborn bewilderment, with the last of her 
effort at self-deceit, she moaned in a voice of tearfully petulant re- 
proach. “Are you really incapable of forgiveness?” 

“No, Mother,” he answered, “I’m not. 1 would have forgiven the 
past — if, today, you had urged me to quit and disappear.” 

There was a cold wind outside, tightening his overcoat about him 
like an embrace, there was the great, fresh sweep of country stretch- 
ing at the foot of the hill, and the clear, receding sky of twilight. 
Like two sunsets ending the day, the red glow of the sun was a 

893 



straight, still band in the west, and the breathing red band in the 
east was the glow of his mills. 

The feel of the steering wheel under bis hands and of the smooth 
highway streaming past, as he sped to New York, had an oddly 
bracing quality. It was a sense of extreme precision and of relaxation, 
together, a sense of action without strain, which seemed inexplicably 
youthful— tin til he realized that this was the way he had acted and 
had expected always to act, in his youth — and what he now felt was 
like the simple, astonished question; Why should one ever have to 
act in any other manner? 

It seemed to him that the skyline of New York, when it rose 
before him, had a strangely luminous clarity, though its shapes were 
veiled by distance, a clarity that did not seem to rest in the object, 
but felt as if the illumination came from him. He looked at the great 
city, with no tie to any view or usage others had made of it, it was 
not a city of gangsters or panhandlers or derelicts or whores, it was 
the greatest industrial achievement in the history of man, its only 
meaning was that which it meant to him, there was a personal quality 
in his sight of it, a quality of possessiveness and of unhesitant pcrcep- 
tion, as if he were seeing it for the first time — or the last. 

He paused in the silent corridor of the Wayne-Falkland. at the 
door of the suite he was to enter; it took him a long moment’s effort 
to lift his hand and knock: it was the suite that had belonged to 
Francisco d’Anconia. 

There were coils of cigarette smoke weaving through the an of 
the drawing room, among the velvet drapes and bare, polished tables. 
With its costly furniture and the absence of all personal belongings, 
the room had that air of dreaiy luxury which pertains to transient 
occupancy, as dismal as the air of a flophouse. Five figures rose in 
the fog at his entrance: Wesley Mouch. Eugene Lawson, James Tag- 
gart, Dr. Floyd Ferris and a slim, slouching man who looked like a 
rat-faced tennis player and was introduced to him as Tinky 
Holloway. 

‘"All right,” said Rearden, cutting off the greetings, the smiles, the 
offers of drinks and the comments on the national emergency, “what 
did you want?” 

“We're here as your friends, Mr. Rearden,” said Tinky Holloway, 
“purely as your friends, for an informal conversation with a view to 
closer mutual teamwork.” 

“We’re anxious to avail ourselves of your outstanding ability,” 
said Lawson, “and your expert advice on the country’s industrial 
problems.” 

“It’s men like you that we need in Washington,” said Dr. Ferris. 
“There’s no reason why you should have Remained an outsider for 
so long, when your voice is needed at t^e top level of national 
leadership.” 

The sickening thing about it, thought ? Rearden, was that the 
speeches were only half-lies; the other half, }n their tone of hysterical- 
urgency, was the unstated wish to have it somehow be true. “What 
did you want?” he asked. « 

“Why . . « to listen to you, Mr. Rearden,” said Wesley Mouch, the 

894 



jerk of his features imitating a frightened smile; the smile was faked, 
the fear was real. “We ... we want the benefit of your opinion on 
the nation’s industrial crisis,” 

“1 have nothing to say.” 

“But, Mr, Rearden,” said Dr. Ferris, “all we want is a chance to 
co-operate with you.” 

*Tve told you once, publicly, that I don’t co-operate at the point 
of a gun.” 

“Can’t we bury the hatchet at a time like this?” said Lawson 
beseechingly. 

“The gun? Go ahead.” 

“Uh?” 

“It’s you who’re holding it. Bury it, if you think you can.” 

“That . . . that was just a figure of speech,” Lawson explained, 
blinking. “1 was speaking metaphorically.” 

“I wasn’t.” 

“Can’t we all stand together for the sake of the country in this 
hour of emergency?” said Dr. Ferris. “Ca n’t we disregard our differ- 
ences of opinion? We’re willing to meet you halfway. If there's any 
aspect of our policy which you oppose, just tell us and we’ll issue a 
directive la — ” 

“Cut it, boys. I didn't corne here to help you pretend that I'm not 
in the position I’m tn and that any halfway is possible between us. 
Now come to the point You’ve prepared some new gimmick to 
spring on the steel industry. What is iC” 

“As a matter of fact,” said Mouch, “we do have a vital question 
to discuss in regard to the steel industry', bul . . . but your language. 
Mr. Rcarden!'' 

“We don't want to spring anything on you,” said Holloway. “We 
asked you here to discuss it with you.” 

“1 came here to take orders. Give them.” 

“But, Mr. Rcarden, we don’t want to look at it that way We don’t 
want to give you orders. We want your voluntary consent.” 

Rcarden smiled. “1 know it.” 

“You do?” Holloway started eagerly, but something about Rear- 
den’s smile made him slide into uncertainty. “Well, then — ” 

“And you, brother,” said Rcarden, “know that that is the flaw in 
your game, the fatal flaw that will blast it sky-high. Now do you tell 
me what clout on my head you're working so hard not to let me 
notice— or do l go home?” 

“Oh no, Mr. Rcarden!” cried Lawson, with a sudden dart of his 
eyes to his wrist watch. “You can't go now!— That is, I mean, you 
wouldn’t want to go without hearing what wc have to say.” 

“Then let me hear it.” 

He saw them glancing at one another. Wesley Mouch seemed 
afraid to address him; Mouch’s face assumed an expression of petu- 
lant stubbornness, like a signal of command pushing the others for- 
ward; whatever their qualifications to dispose of the fate of the steel 
industry, they had been brought here to act as Mouch’s conversa- 
tional bodyguards. Rearden wondered about the reason for the pres* 

895 



ence of Janies Taggart; Taggart sat in gloomy silence, sullenly sipping 
a drink, never glancing in his direction. 

“We have worked out a plan,” said Dr. Ferris too cheerfully, 
“which will solve the problems of the steel industry and which will 
meet with your full approval, as a measure providing for the general 
welfare, while protecting your interests and insuring your safety in 
a—” 

“Don’t try to tell me what Fm going to think. Give me the facts.” 

“It is a plan which is fair, sound, equitable and — ” 

“Don’t tell me your evaluation. Give me the facts ” 

“It is a plan which — ” Dr. Ferris stopped; he had lost the habit 
of naming facts. 

“Under this plan,” said Wesley Mouch. “we will grant the industry 
a five per cent increase in the price of steel.” He paused triumphantly. 

Reardcn said nothing. 

“Of course, some minor adjustments will be necessary,” said Hol- 
loway airily, leaping into the silt* nee as onto a vacant tennis court. 
“A certain increase in prices will have to be granted to the producers 
of iron ore — oh, three per cent at most— -in view of the added hard- 
ships which some of them. Mr. Larkin of Minnesota, for instance, 
will now encounter, inasmuch as they’ll have to ship their ore by the 
costly means of trucks, since Mr. James Taggart has had to sacrifice 
his Minnesota branch Ime to the public welfare. And, of course, an 
increase m freight rates will have to be granted to the country’s 
railroads — let's say, seven per cent, roughly speaking— in view of the 
absolutely essential need tor — ” 

Holloway stopped, like a player emerging from a whirlwind activ- 
■ ity to notice suddenly that no opponent was answering his shots. 

“But there will be no increase in wages,” said Dr. Ferris hastily 
“An essential point of the plan is that we will grant no increase in 
wages to the steel workers, m spile of their insistent demands. We 
do wish to be fair to you. Mr. Rearden, and to protect your inter- 
ests — even at the risk of popular resentment and indignation." 

“Of course, if we expect labor to make a sacrifice,” said Lawson, 
“we must show them that management, too, is making certain sacri- 
fices for the sake of the country. The mood of labor in the steel 
industry is extremely tense at present, Mr. Reardcn, it is dangerously 
explosive and . . . and in order to protect you from . . . from ...” 
He stopped, 

“Yes?” said Rearden. “From?” 

“From possible . . . violence, certain measures arc necessary, 
which . . . Look, Jim”--he turned suddenly} to James Taggart— “why 
don’t you explain it to Mr. Rearden. as a jfellow industrialist?” 

“Well, somebody’s got to support the raSroads,” said Taggart sul- 
len^ not looking at him. “The country nfeds railroads and some- 
body’s got to help us carry the load, and if; we don’t get an increase 
in freight rates — ” 

“No, no, no!” snapped Wesley Mouch. !Tell Mr. Rearden about * 
the working of the Railroad Unification Plan.” 

“Well, the Plan is a full success,” said T&ggart lethargically, “ex- 
cept for the not fully controllable element of time. It is only a ques- 

8 % 



tion of time before our unified teamwork puts every railroad in the 
country back on its feet. The Plan, Pm in a position to assure you, 
would work as successfully for any other industry.” 

“No doubt about that,” said Rcarden, and turned to Mouch. “Why 
do you ask the stooge to waste my time? What has the Railroad 
Unification Plan to do with me?” 

“But, Mr. Rearden,” cried Mouch with desperate cheerfulness, 
“that’s the pattern we’re to follow! That’s what we called you here 
to discuss!” 

“What?” 

“The Steel Unification Plan!” 

There was an instant of silence, as of breaths drawn after a plunge. 
Rearden sat looking at them with a glance that seemed to be a 
glance of interest. 

“In view of the critical plight of the steel industry,” said Mouch 
with a sudden rush, as if not to give himself time to know what 
made him uneasy about the nature ot Reardon’s glance, “and since 
steel is the most vitally, crucially basic commodity, the foundation 
of our entire industrial structure, drastic measures must be taken to 
preserve the country’s steel-making facilities, equipment and plant.” 
The tone and impetus of public speaking carried him that far and no 
farther. “With this objective in view, our Plan is . . . our Plan is . . .” 

“Our Plan is really very simple,” said Tinky Holloway, striving to 
prove it by the gaily bouncing simplicity of his voice. “Well lift all 
restrictions from the production of steel and every company will 
produce all it can, according to its ability. But to avoid the waste 
and danger of dog-eat-dog competition, all the companies will de- 
posit their gross earnings into a common pool, to be known as the 
Steel Unification Pool, in charge of a special Board. At the end of 
the year, the Board will distribute these earnings by totaling the 
nation’s steel output and dividing it by the number of open hearth 
furnaces in existence, thus arriving at an average which will be fair 
to all — and every company will be paid according to its need. The 
preservation of its furnaces being its basic need, every company will 
be paid according to the number of furnaces it owns.” 

He stopped, waited, then added. “That’s it, Mr. Rearden,” and 
getting no answer, said. “Oh, there’s a lot of wrinkles to be ironed 
out, but . . . but that’s it.” 

Whatever reaction they had expected, it was not the one they saw. 
Rearden leaned back in his chair, his eyes attentive, but fixed on 
space, as if looking at a not too distant distance, then he asked, with 
an odd note of quietly impersonal amusement, “Will you tell me just 
one thing, boys, what is it you’re counting on?" 

He knew that they understood. He saw, on their faces, that stub- 
bornly evasive look which he had once thought to be the look of a 
liar cheating a victim, but which he now knew to be worse: the look 
of a man cheating himself of his own consciousness. They did not 
answer. They remained silent, as if struggling, not to make him forget 
his question, but to make themselves forget that they had heard it. 

“U's a sound, practical Plan!” snapped James Taggart unexpect- 

897 



edly, with an angry edge of sudden animation in his voice. “It will 
work! It has to work! We want it to work!” 

No one answered him. 

“Mr, Rearden . . . ?” said Holloway timidly. 

“Well, let me see,” said Rearden. “Orren Boyle’s Associated Steel 
owns 60 open-hearth furnaces, one-third of them standing idle and 
the rest producing an average of 3<X) tons of steel per furnace pei 
day. I own 20 open-hearth furnaces, working at capacity, producing 
750 tons of Rearden Metal per furnace per day. So we own 80 
‘pooled’ furnaces with a ‘pooled’ output ot 27,000 tons, which makes 
an average of 337.5 tons per furnace. Each day of the year, I produc- 
ing 15,000 tons, will be paid for 6,750 tons. Boyle, producing 12,000 
tons, will be paid for 20,250 tons. Never mind the other members of 
the pool, they won’t change the scale, except to bring the average 
still lower, most of them doing worse than Boyle, none of them 
producing as much as I. Now how long do you expect me lo last 
under your Plan?” 

There was no answer, then Lawson cried suddenly, blindly, righ- 
teously, “In time of national peril, it is your duty to serve, sutler 
and work for the salvation of the country!” 

“I don’t see why pumping my earnings into Otren Boyle's pocket 
is going to save the country.” 

“You have to make certain sacrifices to the public welfare!” 

“I don't see why Orren Boyle is more 'the public than I am.” 

“Oh, it’s not a question of Mr. Boyle at all! It’s much wider than 
any one person. It's a matter of preserving the country’s natural 
resources— such as factories — and saving the whole of the nation's 
industrial plant. We cannot permit the ruin of an establishment as 
vast as Mr. Boyle’s. The country needs it.” 

“I think,” said Rearden slowly, “that the country needs me much 
more than it needs Orren Boyle ” 

“Bqt of course!” cned Lawson with startled enthusiasm. “The 
country needs you, Mr. Rearden! You do realize that, don't you?” 

But Lawson’s avid pleasure at the familiar formula of self-immola- 
tion, vanished abruptly at the sound of Rearden's voice, a cold, trad- 
er’s voice answering: “1 do.” 

“It’s not Boyle alone who’s involved,” said Holloway pleadingly. 
“The country’s economy would not be able to stand a major disloca- 
tion at the present moment. There are thousands of Boyle’s workers, 
suppliers and customers. What would happen to them if Associated 
Steel went bankrupt?” 

“What will happen to the thousands of my workers, suppliers and 
customers when / go bankrupt?” ; 

“Vow, Mr. Rearden?” said Holloway incredulously. “But you’re 
the richest, safest and strongest industrialist in the country at this 
moment!” 

“What about the moment after next?” 

“Uh?” 

“How long do you expect me to be able to produce at a loss?” 

“Oh, Mr, Rearden, I have complete faith in you!” 

“To hell with your faith! How do you expect me to do it?” 

RQR 



“You’ll manage! ” 

“How?” 

There was no answer. 

44 We can’t theorize about the future,” cried Wesley Mouch, “when 
there’s an immediate national collapse to avoid! We’ve got to save 
the country’s economy! We’ve got to do something!” Rearden ’s im- 
perturbable glance of curiosity drove him to heedlessness. “If you 
don’t like it, do you have a better solution to offer?” 

“Sure*” said Rearden easily, if it’s production that you want, then 
get out of the way, junk all of your damn regulations, let Orren 
Boyle go broke, let me buy the plant of Associated Steel — and it 
will be pouring a thousand ions a day from every one of its sixty 
turnaces.” 

“Oh, but . . . but we couldn’t!” gasped Mouch. “That would be 
monopoly!” 

Reaiden chuckled. “Okay." he said indifferently, “then let my 
mills superintendent buy it. He’ll do a better job than Boyle.” 

“Oh, but that would be letting the strong have an advantage over 
the weak! We couldn’t do that!” 

“Then don’t talk about saving the country’s economy,” 

“All we want is — ” He stopped. 

“All you want is production without men who're able to produce, 
isn't it?” 

“That . . . that’s theory. That’s just a theoretical extreme. All we 
want is a temporary adjustment." 

“You've been making those temporary adjustments for years. 
Don't you see that you've run out of lime?” 

“That’s just theo . . His voice trailed off and stopped. 

“Well, now, look here,” said Holloway cautiously, “it's not as if 
Mr. Boyle were actually . . . weak. Mr. Boyle is an extremely able 
man. It’s just that he’s suffered some unfortunate reverses, quite 
beyond his control. He had invested large sums in a public-spirited 
project to assist the undeveloped peoples of South America, and that 
copper crash of theirs has dealt him a severe financial blow. So it’s 
only a matter of giving him a chance to recover, a helping hand to 
bridge the gap, a bit of temporary assistance, nothing more. All we 
have to do is just equalize the sacrifice— then everybody will recover 
and prosper.” 

“You’ve been equalizing sacrifice for over a hundred” — he stopped— 
“for thousands of years.” said Rearden slowly. “Don’t you sec that 
you're at the end of the road?” 

“That’s just theory!” snapped Wesley Mouch. 

Rearden smiled. “I know 7 your practice.” he said softly. “It’s your 
theory (hat I’m trying to understand.” 

He knew that the specific reason behind the Plan was Orren Boyle; 
he knew that the working of an intricate mechanism, operated by 
pull, threat, pressure, blackmail — a mechanism like an irrational add- 
ing machine run amuck and throwing up any chance sum at the 
whim of any moment — had happened to add up to Boyle’s pressure 
upon these men to extort for him this last piece of plunder. He knew 
also that Boyle was not the cause of it or the essential to consider, 

899 



that Boyle was only a chance rider, not the builder, of the infernal 
machine that had destroyed the world, that it was not Boyle who 
had made it possible, nor any of the men in this room. They, too, 
were only riders on a machine without a driver, they were trembling 
hitchhikers who knew that their vehicle was about to crash into its 
final abyss — and it was not love or fear of Boyle that made them 
cling to their course and press on toward their end, it was something 
else, it was some one nameless element which they knew and evaded 
knowing, something which was neither thought nor hope, something 
he identified only as a certain look in their faces, a furtive look 
vSaying: 1 can get away with it. Why? — he thought. Why do they think 
they can? 

“We can't afford any theories!" cried Wesley Mouch. “We've got 
to act!” 

“Well, then. I’ll offer you another solution. Why don't you take 
over my mills and be done with it?" 

The jolt that shook them was genuine terror. 

“Oh no!" gasped Mouch. 

“We wouldn’t think of it!" cried Holloway. 

“We stand for free enterprise!" cried Dr. Ferris. 

“We don’t want to harm you!'’ cried Lawson. “We’re your friends, 
Mr. Rearden. Gin’t we all work together? We're your friends." 

There, across the room, stood a table with a telephone, the same 
table, most likely, and the same instrument— and suddenly Rearden 
felt as if he were seeing the convulsed figure of a man bent over 
that telephone, a man who had then known what he, Rearden, was 
now beginning to learn, a man fighting to refuse him the same re- 
quest which he was now refusing to the present tenants of this 
room — he saw the finish of that fight, a man’s tortured face lifted to 
confront him and a desperate voice saying steadily: “Mr. Rearden, 
l swear to you ... by the woman 1 love . . . that 1 am your friend." 

This was the act he had then called treason, and this was the man 
he had rejected in order to go on serving the men confronting him 
now. Who, then, had been the traitor? — he thought; he thought it 
almost without feeling, without right to feel, conscious of nothing 
but a solemnly reverent clarity. Who had chosen to give its present 
tenants the means to acquire this room? Whom had he sacrificed 
and to whose profit? 

“Mr. Rearden!" moaned Lawson. “What’s the matter?" 

He turned his head, saw I-awson’s eyes watching him fearfully and 
guessed what look Lawson had caught in his face. 

“We don’t want to seize your mills!" cri&i Mouch. 

“We don’t want to deprive you of your property!" cried Dr. Ferris. 
“You don’t understand us!" 

“I’m beginning to.” 

A year ago, he thought, they would have&shot him; two years ago. 
they would have confiscated his property; generations ago, men of 
their kind had been able to afford the luxury of murder and expropri-. 
atioit, the safety of pretending to themselves and their victims that 
material loot was their only objective. Bui their time was running 
out and his fellow victims had gone, gone sooner than any historical 

900 



schedule had promised, and they, the looters, were now left to face 
the undisguised reality of their own goal 
“Look, boys,” he said wearily, “I know what you want. You want 
to eat my mills and have them, too. And all l want to know is this: 
what makes you think it’s possible?” 

“I don’t know what you mean,” said Mouch m an injured tone of 
voice. “We said we didn't want your mills.” 

“All right. I’ll say it more precisely. You want to eat me and have 
me, too. How do you propose to do it?” 

“1 don’t know how you can say that, after we’ve given you every 
assurance that we consider you of invaluable importance to the coun- 
try, to the steel industry, to — ” 

“1 believe you. That’s what makes the riddle harder. You consider 
me of invaluable importance lo the country? Hell, you consider me 
ol invaluable importance even to your own necks You sit there, 
trembling, because you know, that I m the last one left to save your 
lives --and you know that time is as short as that. Yet you propose 
a plan to destroy me, a plan which demands, with an idiot’s crude- 
ness, without loopholes, detours or escape, that I work at a loss — 
that 1 work, with every ton 1 pour costing me more than I'll get for 
it that I teed the last of my wealth away until we all starve together. 

I hat much irrationality is not possible to any man or any looter. Per 
your own sake— never inind the country's or mine -you must be 
counting on something What?” 

He saw the gelting-away-with-il look on their faces, a peculiar 
look that seemed secretive, vet resentful, as il. incredibly, it were he 
who was hiding some secret from them, 

“1 don’t see why you should choose to take such a defeatist view 
of the situation,” said Mouch sullenly 

“Defeatist? Do you really expect me to be able lo remain in busi- 
ness under your Plan 9 ” 

“But it’s only temporary!” 

“There is no such thing as a temporary suicide ” 

“But it’s only for the duration of the emergency! Only until the 
country recovers!” 

“How do you expect it to recover 1 ” 

There was no answer. 

“How do you expect me to pioducc after I go bankrupt?” 

“You won’t go bankrupt. You'll always produce,” said Dr. Ferris 
indifferently, neither in praise nor in blame, merely in the tone of 
staling a fact of nature, as he would have said to another man: You'll 
always be a bum. “You can't help H It's in your blood. Or, to be 
more scientific, you’re conditioned that way.” 

Rcarden sat up: it was as if he had been struggling to find the 
secret combination of a lock and felt, at those words, a faint click 
within, as of the first tumbler falling inlo place 
“It’s only a matter of weathering this crisis” said Mouch, “of 
giving people a reprieve, a chance to catch up.” 

“And then?” 

“Then things will improve.” 

“How?” 



There was no answer. 

“What will improve them?” 

There was no answer. 

“Who will improve them?” 

“Christ, Mr. Rearden, people don’t just stand still!” cried Hoi 
loway. “They do things, they grow, they move forward!” 

“What people?” 

Holloway waved his hand vaguely. “People,” he said. 

“What people? The people to whom you’re going to feed the last 
of Rearden Steel, without getting anything in return? The people 
who’ll go on consuming more than they produce?” 

“Conditions will change.” 

“Who’ll change them?” 

There was no answer 

“Have you anything left to loot? If you didn’t see the nature of 
your policy before — it's not possible that you don’t see it now. Look 
around you. All those damned People’s States all over the earth 
have been existing only on the handouts which you squeezed for 
them out of this country. But you — you have no place left to sponge 
on or mooch from. No country on the face of the globe. This was 
the greatest and last. You’ve drained it. You’ve milked it dry. Of all 
that irretrievable splendor. I’m only one remnant, the last. What will 
you do, you and your People's Globe, alter you've finished me? 
What are you hoping for? What do you see ahead— -except plain, 
stark, animal starvation?” 

They did not answer. They did not look at him. Their faces wore 
expressions of stubborn resentment, as if his were the plea ot a liar. 

Then Lawson said softly, half in reproach, half in scorn, “Well, 
after all, you businessmen have kept predicting disasters tor years, 
you’ve cried catastrophe at every progressive measure and told us 
that we’il perish — but we haven't.” He stalled a smile, but diew back 
from the sudden intensity of Reardon's eyes. 

Rearden had felt another click in his mind, the sharper click of 
the second tumbler connecting the circuits of the lock. He leaned 
forward. “What are you counting on?” he asked; his tone had 
changed, it was low, it had the steady, pressing, droning sound of 
a drill. 

“It's only a matter of gaining time!” cried Mouth. 

“There isn't any time left to gain.” 

“All we need is a chance!” ciied Lawson. 

“There are no chances left.” , 

“It’s only until wc recover!” cried Holloway. 

“There is no way to recover.” 

“Only until our policies begin to work!” ’cried L)r, Ferris. 

“There is no way to make the irrational work.” There was no 
answer. “What can save you now?” 

“Oh, you’ll do something!” cried James Taggart. 

Then — even though it was only a sentence he had heard all his 
life — he felt a deafening crash within him, as*of a steel door dropping 
open at the touch of the final tumbler, the one small number com- 

902 



pleting the sum and releasing the intricate lock, the answer uniting 
all the pieces, the questions and the unsolved wounds of his life. 

In the moment of silence after the crash, it seemed to him that 
he heard Francisco’s voice, asking him quietly in the ballroom of 
this building, yet asking it also here and now: “Who is the guiltiest 
man in this room?” He heard his own answer of the past: “I sup- 
pose — Janies Taggart?” and Francisco s voice saying without re- 
proach: “No, Mr. Rearden, it’s not James Taggart.”— but here, in 
this room and this moment, his mind answered: “1 am ” 

He had cursed these looters lor their stubborn blindness 7 It was 
he who had made it possible. From the first extortion he had ac- 
cepted, from the first directive he had obeyed, he had given them 
cause to believe that reality was a thing to be cheated, that one could 
demand the irrational and someone somehow would provide it. If 
he had accepted the Equalization of Opportunity Bill, if he had 
accepted Directive 10-289, if he had accepted the law that those who 
could not equal his ability had the right to dispose of it. that those 
who had not earned were to profit, but he who had was to lose, that 
those who could not think were to command, but he who could was 
to obey them- -then were they illogical in believing that they existed 
in an irrational universe? He had made it lor them, he had provided 
it Were they illogical in believing that theirs was only to wish, to 
wish with no concern lor the possible- -and that lus was to fulfill 
their wishes, by means they did not have to know or name? They, 
the impotent mystics, struggling to escape the responsibility of rea- 
son, had known that he, the rationalist, had undertaken to serve 
their whims. They had known that he had given them a blank check 
on reality — his was not to ask why ? — theirs was not to ask how ? — 
lot them demand that he give them a share of his wealth, then all 
that he owns, then more than he owns — impossible?- -no, he’ll do 
something! 

He did not know that he had leaped to his feet, that he stood 
staring down at James Taggart, seeing in the unbridled shapelessness 
oi Taggart’s features the answer to all the devastation he had wit- 
nessed through the years of his life 

“What’s the matter, Mr. Rearden 7 What have I said?” Taggart 
was asking with rising anxiety — but he was out of the reach of Tag- 
gart’s voice. 

He was seeing the progression of the years, the monstrous extor- 
tions, the impossible demands, the inexplicable victories of evil, the 
preposterous plans and unintelligible goals proclaimed in volumes of 
muddy philosophy, the desperate wonder oi the victims who thought 
that some complex, malevolent wisdom was moving the powers de- 
stroying the world — and all of it had rested on one tenet behind the 
shifty eyes of the victors: he'll do something! . . . We’ll get away with 
it — he’ll let us — he'll do something! . . . 

You businessmen kept predicting that we’d perish, but we 
haven’t. ... It was true, he thought. They had not been blind to 
reality, he had— -Wind to the reality he himself had created. No, they 
had not perished, but who had? Who had perished to pay for their 

903 



manner of survival? Ellis Wyatt . . . Ken Danagger . . . Francisco 
d’Anconia. 

He was reaching lor his hat and coat, when he noticed that the 
men in the room were trying to stop him, that their faces had a look 
of panic and their voices were crying in bewilderment: "‘What's the 
matter, Mr. Rearden? . . . Why? . * . But why? . . . What have we 
said? . . . You’re not going! . . . You can’t go! . . . It's too early! . . . 
Not yet! Oh, not yet!” 

He felt as if he were seeing them from the rear window of a 
speeding express, as if they stood on the track behind him, waving 
their arms in futile gestures and screaming indistinguishable sounds, 
their figures growing smaller in the distance, their voices fading. 

One of them tried to stop him as he turned to the door. He pushed 
him out of his way, not roughly, but with a simple, smooth sweep of 
his arm. as one brushes aside an obstructing curtain then walked out. 

Silence was his only sensation, as he sat at the wheel of his car, 
speeding back down the road to Philadelphia. It was the silence of 
immobility within him. as if possessing knowledge, he could now 
afford to rest with no further activity of soul. He felt nothing, neither 
anguish nor elation. It was as if. by an effort of years, he had climbed 
a mountain to gain a distant view and, having reached the top. had 
fallen to he still, to rest before he looked, free to spare himself foi 
the first lime. 

He was aware of the long, empty road streaming, then curving, 
then streaming straight before hirn, of the effortless pressure of his 
hands on the wheel and the screech of the tires on the curves. But 
he felt as if he were speeding down a skyway suspended and coiling 
in empty space. 

The passers-by at the factories, the bridges, the power plants along 
his road saw a sight that had once been natural among them: a trim, 
expensively powerful car driven by a confident man. with the concept 
of success proclaimed more loudly than by any electric sign, pro- 
claimed by the driver’s garments, by his expert steering, by his pur- 
poseful speed. They watched him go past and vanish into the haze 
equating earth with night. 

He saw his mills rising in the darkness, as a black silhouette against 
a breathing glow. The glow was the color of burning gold, and “Rear- 
den Steel” stood written across the sky in the cool, white fire ol 
crystal, 

He looked at the long silhouette, the curves of blast furnaces 
standing like triumphal arches, the smokestacks rising like a solemn 
colonnade along an avenue of honor in an imperial city, the bridges 
hanging like garlands, the cranes saluting HlCc lances, the smoke wav- 
ing slowly like flags. The sight broke the stillness within him and he 
smiled in greeting, ft was a smile of happiness, of love, of dedication. 
He had never loved his mills as he did in |hat moment, for — seeing 
them by an act of his own vision, cleared c If all but his own code of 
values, in a luminous reality that held n$ contradictions — he was- 
seeing the reason of his love: the mills wete an achievement of his 
mind, devoted to his enjoyment of existence, erected in a rational 
world to deal with rational men. If those men had vanished, if that 

904 



world was gone, if his mills had ceased to serve his values— then the 
mills were only a pile of dead scrap, to be left to crumble, the sooner 
the better—* to be left, not as an act of treason, but as an act of 
loyalty to their actual meaning. 

The mills were still a mile ahead when a small spurt ot flame 
caught his sudden attention. Among all the shades of fire in the vast 
spread of structures, he could tell the abnormal and the out-of-place: 
this one was too raw a shade of yellow and it was darting from a 
spot where no fire had reason to be, from a structure by the gate of 
the main entrance. 

In the next instant, he heard the dry crack of a gunshot, then three 
answering cracks in swift succession, like an angry hand slapping a 
sudden assailant. 

Then the black mass barring the road in the distance took shape, 
it was not mere darkness and it did not recede as he came closer— 
it was a mob squirming at the main gate, trying to storm the nulls. 

He had time to distinguish waving arms, some with clubs, some 
with crowbars, some with rifles — the yellow flames of burning wood 
gushing from the window of the gatekeeper’s office— the blue cracks 
of gunfire darting out of the mob and the answers spitting from the 
roof ot the structures- -he had time to see a human figure twisting 
backward and falling from the top of a car — then he sent his wheels 
into a shrieking curve, turning into the darkness of a side road. 

He was going at the rate of sixty miles an hour down the ruts of 
an unpaved soil, toward the eastern gale ot the mills — and the gate 
was in sight when the impact of tires on a gully threw the car off 
the road, to the edge ol a ravine where an ancient slag heap lay at 
the bottom. With the weight of his chest and elbow on the wheel, 
pitted against two tons ol speeding metal, the curve ot his body 
torccd the curve ot the car to complete its screaming halfcircle 
sweeping it back onto the road and into the control of his hands. It 
had taken one instant, but in the next his foot went down on the 
brake, tearing the engine to a stop: for in the moment when his 
headlights had swept the ravine, he had glimpsed an oblong shape, 
darker than the gray of the weeds on the slope, and it had seemed to 
him that a brief while blur had been a human hand waving for help. 

Throwing off his overcoat, he went huirying down the side of the 
ravine, lumps of earth giving way under his leet, he went catching 
at the dried coils of brush, half-running, half-sliding toward the long 
black form which he could now distinguish to be a human body. A 
veum of cotton was swimming against the moon, he could see the 
white of a hand and the shape ot an arm lying stretched in the 
weeds, but the body lay still, with no sign of motion. 

Si Mr. Rearden 

It was a whisper struggling to be a cry, it was the terrible sound 
of eagerness fighting against a voice that could be nothing but a 
moan of pain. 

He did not know which came first, it felt like a single shock: his 
thought that the voice was familiar, a ray of moonlight breaking 
through the cotton, the movement of falling down on his knees by the 
white oval of a face, and the recognition. It was the Wet Nurse. 

905 



He felt the boy’s hand clutching his with the abnormal strength 
of agony, while he was noticing the tortured lines of the face, the 
drained lips, the glazing eyes and the thin, dark trickle from a small, 
black hole in too wrong, too close a spot on the left side of the 
boy's chest. 

“Mr. Rearden ... I wanted to stop them ... I wanted to save 
you . . 

“What happened to you. kid?’* 

“They shot me, so 1 wouldn’t talk ... I wanted to prevent" — his 
hand fumbled toward the red glare in the sky— “what they're 
doing ... I was too late, but I’ve tried to . . . I’ve tried . , . And . , . 
Fm still able ... to talk . . . Listen, they — " 

“You need help. Let’s get you to a hospital and — ” 

“No! Wait! 1 ... I don't think 1 have much time left to me and . . . 
and I’ve got to tell you . . Listen, that riot . . . it’s staged . on 
orders from Washington . . . It's not workers . . . not your workers . . . 
it's those new boys of theirs and . . . and a lot of goons hired on 
the outside . . . Don’t believe a word they'll tell you about it . . 

It’s a frame-up . . . it’s iheir rotten kind of frame -up . . 

There was a desperate intensity in the hoy’s face, the intensity of 
a crusader's battle, his voice seemed to gain a sound of life from 
some fuel burning m broken spurts whhin him -and Rearden knew 
that the greatest assistance he could now render was to listen. 

“They . . . they’ve got a Steel Unification Plan ready . . . and they 
need an excuse for it . . . because they know that the country won't 
take it . . . and you won t stand for it . . They’re afraid this one's 

going to be too much tor everybody . . . it's just a plan to skin you 
alive, that’s all . . . So they want to make it look like you're starving 
your workers . . . and the workers are running amuck and you'ie 
unable to control them . . . and the government’s got to step m tor 
your own protection and for public satety . . . That’s going to be 
their pitch, Mr. Rearden . . 

Rearden was noticing the torn flesh of the boy's hands, the drying 
mud of blood and dust on his palms and his clothing, gray patches 
of dust on knees and stomach, scrambled with the needles of burs. 
In the intermittent fits of moonlight, he could see the trail of flat- 
tened weeds and glistening smears going off into the darkness below 
He dreaded to think how far the boy had crawled and for how long. 

“They didn't want you to be here tonight, Mr. Real den . . . They 
didn’t want you to see their ‘People’s rebellion’ . . . Afterwards . . . 
you know how they screw up the evidence . . . there won’t be a 
straight story to get anywhere , . . and they hope to fool the 
country . . . and you . . . that they’re acting to protect you from 
violence . , . Don't let them get away with ij. Mr. Rearden! . . . Tell 
the country . . . tell the people . . . tell the newspapers . . . Tell them 
that I told you . . . it’s under oath . . 1 sviear it . . . that makes' it 
legal, doesn’t it? . . . doesn’t it? . . . that gives you a chance?” 

Rearden pressed the boy’s hand in his. “Thank you, kid.” 

“I . , . Fm sorry Fm late, Mr. Rearden, but . . . but they didn't 
let me in on it till the last minute , . , till just before it started . . . 
They called me in on a ... a strategy conference . . . there was a 

906 



man there by the name of Peters . . . from the Unification Board - , ► 
he’s a stooge of Tinky Holloway * . . who’s a stooge of Orren 
Boyle . , . What they wanted from me was . . . they wanted me to 
sign a lot of passes . . , to Jet some of the goons in ... so they’d 
start trouble from the inside and the outside together ... to make 
it look like they really were your workers ... I refused to sign 
the passes."’ 

“You did? After they’d let you in on their game?" 

“But . . . but, of course. Mr. Rearden . . . Did you think I’d play 
that kind of game?” 

“No, kid, no, 1 guess not. Only — " 

“What?” 

“Only that’s when you stuck your neck out ” 

“But 1 had to! ... I couldn't help them wreck the mills, could 
J? . . . How long was I to keep from stickmg my neck out? Till they 
broke yours? . . . And what would 1 do with my neck, if that's how 
I had to keep it 9 . . . You . . . , you understand it, don’t you, 
Mr. Rearden?” 

“Yes. 1 do " 

"I refused them ... 1 ran out of the office . . 1 ran to look for 
the superintendent ... to tell him everything . . but I couldn’t find 
him . . . and then 1 heard shots at the main gate and 1 knew it had 
started ... 1 tried to phone your home . . . the phone wires were 
cut ... 1 ran to get my car, 1 wanted to reach you or a policeman 
or a newspaper or somebody . . . but they must have been following 
me that’s when they shot me . . in the parking lot . from 

behind . . . all 1 remember is falling and . . . and then, when I opened 
mv eyes, they had dumped me here . . . on the slag heap . ." 

“On the slag heap 0 " said Rearden slowly, knowing that the heap 
was a bundled feet below. 

The boy nodded, pointing vaguely down into the darkness. “Yeah . . . 
down there . . . And then I ... 1 started crawling . crawling up . . . 

1 wanted , . 1 wanted to last till 1 told somebody who’d tell you." 

1'he pain-twisted lines ol his face smoothed suddenly into a smile; 
his voice had the sound of a lifetime's triumph as he added, “i have.” 
Then he jerked his head up and asked, in the tone of a child’s 
astonishment at a sudden discover), “Mr. Rearden, is this how it 
feels to . . . to want something very much . . very desperately 
much . . and to make it°" 

“Yes. kid, that’s how' it feels." Ihe boy’s head dropped back 
against Reardon’s arm, the eyes closing, the mouth relaxing, as if to 
hold a moment’s profound contentment. “But you can’t stop there. 
You’re not through. You’ve got to hang on till l get you to a doctor 
and- He was lifting the boy cautiously, but a convulsion of pain 
ran through the boy’s lace, his mouth twisting to stop a cry— and 
Rearden had to lower him gently back to the ground. 

The boy shook his head with a glance that was almost apology. 
“1 won’t make it, Mr. Rearden . . . No use fooling myself . . . i know 

I’m through.” ... , 

Then, as if by some dim recoil against self-pity, he added, reciting 
a memorized lesson, his voice a desperate attempt at his old, cynical, 

907 



intellectual tone, “What does it matter, Mr. Rearden? . . . Man is 
only a collection of . . . conditioned chemicals . . . and a man’s dying 
doesn’t make . . . any more difference than an animal's.*' 

“You know better than that." 

“Yes," he whispered. “Yes, I guess 1 do." 

His eyes wandered over the vast darkness, then rose to Rearden’s 
face; the eyes were helpless, longing, childishly bewildered, “1 
know . . . it's crap, all those things they taught us . . . all of it. 
everything they said . . . about living or . . . or dying . . . Dying . . . 
it wouldn't make any difference to chemicals, but — “ he stopped, 
and all of his desperate protest was only in the intensity of his voice 
dropping lower to say, ‘ --but it does, to me . . And . . . and, 1 

guess, it makes a difference to an animal, too . . . But they said there 
are no values . . . only social customs . No values!" His hand 
clutched blindly at the hole in his chest, as if trying to hold that 
which he was losing. “No . . . values . , ." 

Then his eyes opened wider, with the sudden calm of full frank- 
ness. “I'd like to live, Mr. Rearden. God, how I'd like to!" His voice 
was passionately quiet, “Not because I'm dying . . . but because I've 
just discovered it tonight, what it means, really to be alive . 
And . . . it's funny . do you know when 1 discovered it? ... In 
the office . , . when 1 stuck my neck out . . . when 1 told the bastards 
to go to hell . . . There's . . . there’s so many things I wish I'd known 
sooner . . . But . . well, it’s no use crying over spilled milk " He 
saw Rearden’s involuntary glance at the flattened trail below and 
added, “Over spilled anything, Mr. Rearden.” 

. “Listen, kid," said Rearden sternly, "I want you to do me a favor." 

"Mow, Mr. Rearden?" 

“Yes. Now " 

“Why, of course, Mr. Real den ... if 1 can " 

# “You've done me a big favor tonight, but 1 want >ou to do a still 
bigger one. You've done a great job. climbing out of that slag heap. 
Now will you try for something still harder'* You were willing to die 
to save my mills. Will you try to live for me?*' 

“For you, Mr. Rearden?" 

“For me. Because I m asking you to. Because I want you to. Be- 
cause we still have a great distance to climb together, you and 1." 

“Does it . . . does it make a difference to you, Mr. Reai den? ’ 

“It does. Will you make up your mind that you want to live just 
as you did down there on the slag heap? That you want to last and 
live? Will you fight for it? You wanted to light my battle. Will you 
fight this one with me, as our iirsl?" J 

He felt the clutching of the boy’s hand: a conveyed the violent 
eagerness of the answer; the voice was onjy a whisper “I'll tiy, 
Mr. Rearden." 

“Now help me to get you to a doctor, fusfc' relax, take it easy and 
let me lift you." 

“Yes, Mr. Rearden." With the jerk of a Sudden effort, the boy 
pulled himself up to lean on an elbow. 

“Take it easy, Tony.” 


908 



He saw a sudden flicker in the boy’s face, an attempt *at his old, 
bright, impudent grin. “Not ‘Non-Absolute’ any more?” 

“No, not any more. You’re a full absolute now, and you know it.” 

“Yes. I know several of them, now. There’s one”— he pointed at 
the wound in his chest— “that’s an absolute, isn’t it? And”— he went 
on speaking while Rcarden was lifting him from the ground by im- 
perceptible seconds and inches, speaking as if the trembling intensity 
of his words were serving as an anesthetic against the pain — “and 
men can’t live ... if rotten bastards . . . like the ones in 
Washington ... get away with things like . . . like the one they're 
doing tonight ... if everything becomes a stinking fake . . and 
nothing is real . . . and nobody is anybody . . . men can’t live that 
way . . . that's an absolute, isn’t it?” 

“Yes, Tony, that’s an absolute ” 

Reardon rose to his feet by a long, cautious effort; he saw the 
tortured spasm of the boy’s features, as he settled him slowly against 
his chest, like a baby held tight in his arms — but the spasm twisted 
into another echo of the impudent grin, and the boy asked, “Who's 
the Wet Nurse now?” 

“I guess I am.” 

He took the first steps up the slant of crumbling soil, his body 
tensed to the task of shock absorber for his fragile burden, to the 
task of maintaining a steady progression where there was no foothold 
to find. 

The boy’s head dropped on Reardon's shoulder, hesitantly, almost 
as if this were a presumption. Rcarden bent down and pressed his 
lips to the dust-streaked forehead. 

The boy jerked back, laising his head with a shock of incredulous, 
indignant astonishment. “Do you know what you did?” he whis- 
pered, as if unable to believe that it was meant for him. 

“Put your head down,” said Rcarden, “and I'll do it again.” 

The boy’s head dropped and Rcarden kissed his forehead; it was 
like a father’s recognition granted to a son’s battle. 

The boy lay still, his face hidden, his hands clutching Rearden’s 
shoulders. Then, with no hint of sound, with only the sudden beat 
of faint, spaced, rhythmic shudders to show it, Rearden knew that 
the boy was crying— crying in surrender, in admission of all the 
things which he amid not put into the woids he had never found. 

Rcarden went on moving slowly upward, step by groping step, 
fighting for firmness of motion against the weeds, the drifts of dust, 
the chunks of scrap metal, the refuse of a distant age. He went on, 
toward the line where the red glow of his mills marked the edge of the 
pit above him, his movement a fierce struggle that had to take the 
form of a gentle, unhurried flow. 

He heard no sobs, but he felt the rhythmic shudders, and, through 
the cloth of his shirt, in place of tears, he felt the small, warm, liquid 
spurts flung from the wound by the shudders. He knew that the tight 
pressure of his arms was the only answer which the boy was now 
able to hear and understand— and he held the trembling body as if 
the strength of his arms could transfuse some part of his living power 
into the arteries beating ever fainter against him. 

909 



Then the sobbing stopped and the boy raised his head. His face 
seemed thinner and paler, but the eyes were lustrous, and he looked 
up at Rearden, straining for the strength to speak. 

“Mr. Rearden ... I ... I liked you very much.” 

“I know it.” 

The boy's features had no power to form a smile, but it was a 
smile that spoke in his glance, as he looked at Rearden ’s face — as 
he looked at that which he had not known he had been seeking 
through the brief span of his life, seeking as the image of that which 
he had not known to be his values. 

Then his head fell back, and there was no convulsion in his face, 
only his mouth relaxing to a shape of serenity— but there was a brief 
stab of convulsion in his body, like a last cry of protest — and Rear- 
den went on slowly, not altering his pace, even though he knew that 
no caution was necessary any longer because what he was carrying 
in his arms was now that which had been the boy’s teachers' idea 
of a man — a collection of chemicals. 

He walked, as if this were his form of last tribute and funeral 
procession for the young life that had ended in his arms. He felt an 
anger too intense to identify except as a pressure within him: it was 
a desire to kill. 

The desire was not directed at the unknown thug who had sent a 
bullet through the boy’s body, or at the looting bureaucrats who had 
hired the thug to do it, but at the boy's teachers who had delivered 
him, disarmed, to the thug’s gun — at the soft, safe assassins of college 
classrooms who, incompetent to answer the queries of a quest for 
reason, took pleasure in crippling the young minds entrusted to 
their care. 

Somewhere, he thought, there was this boy’s mother, who bad 
trembled with protective concern over his groping steps, while teach- 
ing him to walk, who had measured his baby foimulas with a jewel- 
er's caution, who had obeyed with a zealot’s fervor the latest words 
of science on his diet and hygiene, protecting his unhardened body 
from germs — then had sent him to bo turned into a tortured neurotic 
by the men who taught him that he had no mind and must never 
attempt to think. Had she fed him tainted refuse, he thought, had 
she mixed poison into his food, it would have been more kind and 
less fatal. 

He thought of all the living species that train their young in the 
art of survival, the cats who teach their kittens to hunt, the birds 
who spend such strident effort on teaching their fledglings to fly — 
yet man, whose tool of survival is the mind, does not merely fail to 
teach a child to think, but devotes the child's education to the pur- 
pose of destroying his brain, of convincing him that thought is futile 
and evil, before he has started to think. I 

From the first catch-phrases flung a* a child to the last, it is like 
a series of shocks to freeze his motor, to undercut the power of his 
consciousness. “Don't asK so many questions, children should be 
seen and not heard!" — “Who are you to think? It’s so, because 1 say 
so!” — “Don’t argue, obey!” — “Don’t try to understand, believe!” — 
“Don't rebel, adjust!” — “ Don't stand out, belong !” — “Don’t strug- 

910 



gle, compromise! Your heart is more important than your 
mind!” — “Who are you to know? Your parents know best!”—' “Who 
are you to know? Society knows best*” “Who are you to know? The 
bureaucrats know best!’ —“Who are you to object? All values are 
relative!” — “Who are you to want to escape a thug’s bullet? That’s 
only a personal prejudice!” 

Men would shudder, he thought, if they saw a mother bird pluck- 
ing the feathers from the wings of her young, then pushing him out 
of the nest to struggle for survival— yet that was what they did to 
their children. 

Armed with nothing but meaningless phrases, this boy had been 
thrown to fight for existence, he had hobbled and groped through a 
brief, doomed effort, he had screamed his indignant, bewildered pro- 
test — and had perished in hts first attempt to soar on his mangled 
wings. 

But a different breed of teachers had once existed, he thought, 
and had reared the men who created this country; he thought that 
mothers should set out on their knees to look for men like Hugh 
Akston, to find them and beg them to return. 

He went through the gate of the mills, barely noticing the guards 
who let him enter, who stared at his face and his burden; he did not 
pause to listen to their words, as they pointed to the fighting in the 
distance; he went on walking slowly toward the wedge of light which 
was the open door of the hospital building 

He stepped into a lighted room lull ot men. bloody bandages and 
the odor of antiseptics; he deposited his burden on a bench, with 
no word of explanation to anyone, and walked out, not glancing 
behind him. 

He walked m the direction ol the front gate, toward the glare of 
tire and the bursts of guns. He saw, once in a while, a few figures 
running through the ciacks between structures or darling behind 
hlack corners, pursued by groups of guards and workers: he was 
astonished to notice that his workers were well armed. They seemed 
to have subdued the hoodlums inside the mills, and only the siege 
at the front gate remained to be beaten. He saw a lout scurrying 
across a patch of lamplight, swinging a length of pipe at a wall of 
glass panes, battering them down with an animal relish, dancing like 
a gorilla to the sound of crashing glass, until three husky human 
figures descended upon him. carrying him writhing to the ground. 

The siege of the gate appeared to be ebbing, as if the spine of the 
mob had been broken. He heard the distant sciceches of tlieir cries— 
but the shots from the road were growing rarer, the fire set to the 
gatekeeper’s office was put out, there were armed men on the ledges 
and at windows, posted in well-planned defense. 

On the roof of a structure above the gate, he saw. as he came 
closer, the slim silhouette of a man who held a gun in each hand 
and, from behind the protection of a chimney, kept firing at intervals 
down into the mob, firing swiftly and, it seemed, in two directions 
at once, like a sentinel protecting the approaches to the gate. The 
confident skill of his movements, his manner of firing, with no time 
wasted to take aim, but with the kind of casual abruptness that never 

911 



misses a target, made him look like a hero of Western legend— -and 
Rearden watched him with detached, impersonal pleasure, as if the 
battle of the mills were not his any longer, but he could still enjoy 
the sight of the competence and certainty with which men of that 
distant age had once combatted evil. 

The beam of a roving searchlight struck Rearden’s face, and when 
the light swept past he saw the man on the roof leaning down, as if 
peering in his direction. The man waved to someone to replace him, 
then vanished abruptly from his post. 

Rearden hurried on through the short stretch of darkness ahead — 
but then, from the side, from the crack of an alley, he heard a 
drunken voice yell, “There he is!’" and whirled to see two bcety 
figures advancing upon him. He saw a leering, mindless face with a 
mouth hung loose in a joyless chuckle, and a club in a rising fist — 
he heard the sound of running steps approaching from another direc- 
tion, he attempted to turn his head, then the club crashed down on 
his skull from behind — and in the moment of splitting darkness, 
when he wavered, refusing to believe it, then felt himself going down, 
he felt a strong, protective arm seizing him and breaking his fall, he 
heard a gun exploding an inch above his car, then another explosion 
from the same gun in the same second, but it seemed faint and 
distant, as if he had fallen down a shaft. 

His first awareness, when he opened his eyes, was a sense of pro* 
found serenity. Then he saw that he was lying on a couch in a mod- 
ern, sternly gracious room — then he realized that it was his office 
and that the two men standing beside him were the mills' doctor 
and the superintendent. He felt a distant pain in his head, which 
would have been violent had he cared to notice it, and he felt a strip 
of tape across his hair, on the side of his head. The sense of serenity 
was the knowledge that he was free. 

The meaning of his bandage and the meaning of his office were 
not to be accepted or to exist, together —it was not a combination 
for men to live with — this was not his battle any longer, nor his job. 
nor his business. 

“I think ill be all right, Doctor," he said, raising his head. 

“Yes, Mr. Rearden, fortunately.” The doctor was looking at him 
as if still unable to believe that this had happened to Hank Rearden 
inside his own mills; the doctor’s voice was tense with angry loyalty 
and indignation. “Nothing serious, just a scalp wound and a slight 
concussion. But you must take it easy and allow yourself to rest.” 

“I will,” said Rearden firmly. 

“It’s alt over,” said the superintendent, waying at the mills beyond 
the window, “We’ve got the bastards beateti and on the run. You 
don't have to worry, Mr. Rearden. It’s all oVcr.” 

“It is,” said Rearden. “There must be a |ot of work left for you 
to do. Doctor.” < 

“Oh yes! I never thought I’d live to see the day when — ” 

“I know. Go ahead, take care of it. Til be all right.” 

“Yes, Mr. Rearden.” 

“I'll take care of the place,” said the superintendent, as the doctor 

912 



hurried out. “Everything’s under control, Mr, Rearden. But it was 
the dirtiest—” 

“I know,” said Rearden. “Who was it that saved my life? Some- 
body grabbed me as 1 fell, and fired at the thugs.” 

“Did he! Straight at Iheir faces. Blew their heads off. That was 
that new furnace foreman of ours. Been here two months. Best man 
I’ve ever had. He’s the one who got wise to what the gravy boys 
were planning and warned me, this atternoon. Told me to arm our 
men, as many as we could. We got no help from the police or the 
state troopers, they dodged all over the place with the fanciest delays 
and excuses I ever heard of, it was all fixed in advance, the goons 
weren’t expecting any armed resistance. It was that furnace fore- 
man— Frank Adams is his name— who organized our defense, ran 
the whole battle, and stood on a root, picking off the scum that came 
loo close to the gate. Boy, what a marksman! I shudder to think 
how many of our lives he saved tonight. Those bastards were out 
for blood, Mr. Rearden.” 

“I’d like to see him." 

“He’s waiting somewhere outside. It’s he who brought you here, 
and he asked permission to speak to you. when possible." 

“Send him in Then go back out there, lake charge, finish the job.” 

“Is there anything else I can do for you, Mr. Rearden?” 

“No, nothing else.” 

He lay still, alone in the silence of his office. He knew' that the 
meaning ot his mills had ceased to exist, and the fullness of the 
knowledge left no room for the pain of rcgreifing an illusion. He had 
seen, in a final image, the soul and essence of his enemies: the 
mindJeSvS face of the thug with the club. It was not the face itself 
that made him draw back in horror, but the professors, the philoso- 
phers, the moralists, the mystics who had released that face upon 
the world 

He tell a peculiar cleanliness. It was made of pride and of love 
lor this earth, this earth which was his, not theirs. It was the feeling 
which had moved him through his life, the feeling which some among 
men know in their youth, then betray, but which he had never be- 
trayed and had carried within him as a battered, attacked, unidenti- 
fied, but living motor— the feeling which he could now experience 
in its full, uncontested purity: the sense of his own superlative value 
and the superlative value of his life. It was the final certainty that 
his life was his, to be lived with no bondage to evil, and that that 
bondage had never been necessary. It was the radiant serenity of 
knowing that he w'as tree of fear, of pain, of guilt. 

If it’s true, he thought, that there are avengers who are working 
for the deliverance of men like me, let them see me now, let them 
tell me their secret, let them claim me, let them — “Come in!” he 
said aloud, in answer to the knock on his door. 

The door opened and he lay still. The man standing on the thresh- 
old, with disheveled hair, a soot-streaked face and furnace-smudgec 
arms, dressed in scorched overalls and bloodstained shirt, standing 
as if he wore a cape waving behind hint in the wind, was Franciscc 
d’Anconia. 


913 



It seemed to Rearden that his consciousness shot forward ahead 
of his body, it was his body that refused to move, stunned by shock, 
while his mind was laughing, telling him that this was the most natu- 
ral, the most-to-have-been -expected event in the world. 

Francisco smiled, a smile of greeting to a childhood friend on a 
summer morning, as if nothing else had ever been possible between 
them — and Rearden found himself smiling in answer, sonic part of 
him feeling an incredulous wonder, yet knowing that it was irresist- 
ibly right. 

“You’ve been torturing yourself for months,” said Francisco, ap- 
proaching him, ‘‘wondering what words you'd use to ask my forgive- 
ness and whether you had the right to ask it, if, you ever saw me 
again— but now you see that it isn't necessary, that there’s nothing 
to ask or to forgive.” 

“Yes,” said Rearden, the word coming as an astonished whisper, 
but by the time he finished his sentence he knew that this was the 
greatest tribute he could offer, “yes. I know it.” 

Francisco sat down on the couch beside him, and slowly moved 
his hand over Rearden's forehead. It was like a healing touch that 
closed the past. 

“There’s only one thing l want to tell you,” said Rearden. “I want 
you to hear it from me: you kept your oath, you were my friend." 

“I knew that you knew it. You knew it from the first. You knew 
it, no matter what you thought of my actions. You slapped me be 
cause you could not force yourself to doubt it.” 

“That . . whispered Rearden, staring at him, "that was the thing 
I had no right to tell you ... no right to claim as my excuse . . ” 

“Didn’t you suppose I'd understand it?” 

“1 wanted to find you ... I had no right to look for you . . . And 
all that time, you were — ” fie pointed at Francisco's clothes, then 
his hand dropped helplessly and he closed his eyes. 

“I was your furnace foreman,” said Francisco, grinning. “1 didn't 
think you'd mind that. You offered me the job yourself.” 

“You’ve been here, as my bodyguard, for two months?” 

“Yes.” 

“You’ve been here, ever since- fie stopped. 

“That’s right. On the morning of the day when you were reading 
my farewell message over the roofs of New York, J was reporting 
here for my first shift as your furnace foreman.” 

“Tell me,” said Rearden slowly, “that night at James Taggart's 
wedding, when you said that you were after y0ur greatest conquest . . . 
you meant me, didn’t you?” ; 

“Of course.” v 

Francisco drew himself up a little, as if fof a solemn task, his face 
earnest, the smile remaining only in his eyfs, “1 have a great deal 
to tell you,” he said. “But first, will you ifcpeat a word you once 
offered me and 1 ... I had to reject, because I knew that I was not 
free to accept it?” 

Rearden smiled. “What word, FranciscoV? 

Francisco inclined his head in acceptance, and answered, “Thank 
you, fiank^ Then he raised his head. “Now I’ll tell you the things 

914 



I had come to say, but did not finish, that night when I came here 
for the first time. 1 think you’re ready to hear it.” 

“I am.” 

The glare of steel being poured from a furnace shot to the sky 
beyond the window. A red glow went sweeping slowly over the walls 
of the office, over the empty desk, over Rearden’s face, as if in salute 
and farewell. 


Chapter VII "THIS IS JOHN GALT SPEAKING" 

The doorbell was ringing like an alarm, in a long, demanding scream, 
bioken by the impatient stabs of someone's trantic finger. 

leaping out o< bed, Dagny noticed the cold, pale sunlight of late 
morning and a clock on a distant spire marking the hour of ten. She 
had worked at the office till lour a m and had left word not to expect 
her till noon. 

The white face ungroomed by panic, that confronted her when she 
threw the door open, was James Taggart. 

‘He’s gone!" he cried. 

“Who’” 

"Hank Rcarden! He’s gone. quit, vanished, disappeared!” 

She stood still for a moment, holding the bell of the dressing gown 
she had been tying; then, as the full knowledge reached her. her 
hands jerked the belt light — as il snapping her body in two at the 
waistline -while she burst out laughing. It was a sound of triumph. 

He stared at her in bewilderment. “What’s the matter with you?” 
he gasped. “Haven't you understood?” 

“Come in, Jim,” she said, turning contemptuously, walking into 
the living room. “Oh yes. I’ve understood.” 

“He's quit! Gone! Gone like all the others! Left his mills, his 
bank accounts, his property, everything! Just vanished! Took some 
clothing and whatever he had in the safe in his apartment — they 
lound a safe left open in his l^edroom, open and empty— that's all! 
No word, no note, no explanation! They called me from Washington, 
but it’s all over town! The news, 1 mean, the stoiy! They can’t keep 
it quiet! They’ve tried to. but . . Nobody knows how it got out. but 
it went through the mills like one of those furnace break-outs, the 
word that he’d gone, and then . . . before anyone could stop it, a 
whole bunch ot them vanished! The superintendent, the chief metal- 
lurgist, the chid engineer. Reardon's secretary, even the hospital 
doctor! And God knows how many others! Deserting, the bastards! 
Deserting us. in spite of all the penalties we've set up! He's quit and 
the rest arc quitting and those nulls are just left there, standing still! 
Do you understand what that means?” 

“Do youV' she asked. 

He had thrown his story at her, sentence by sentence, as if trying 
to knock the smile off her face, an odd, unmoving smile of bitterness 
and triumph: he had failed, “it's a national catastrophe! What’s the 
matter with you? Don’t you see that it’s a fatal blow? It will break 

915 



the last of the country’s morale and economy! We can’t let him 
vanish! You’ve got to bring him back!” 

Her smile disappeared. 

“You can!” he cried. “You’re the only one who can! He's your 
lover, isn't he? ... Oh, don’t look like that! it’s no time for squea- 
mishness! It's no time for anything except that we’ve got to have 
him! You must know where he is! You can find him! You must 
reach him and bring him back!” 

The way she now looked at him was worse than her smile— she 
looked as if she were seeing him naked and would not endure the 
sight much longer. “I can't bring him back,” she said, not raising 
her voice. “And l wouldn’t, if I could. Now get out of here.” 

“But the national catastrophe — ” 

“Get out.” 

She did not notice his exit. She stood alone in the middle of her 
living room, her head dropping, her shoulders sagging, while she was 
smiling, a smile of pain, of tenderness, of greeting to Hank Rearden. 
She wondered dimly why she should feel so glad that he had found 
liberation, so certain that he was right, and yet refuse herself the 
same deliverance. Two sentences were beating in her mind; one was 
the triumphant sweep of: He’s free, he’s out of their reach! — the 
other was like a prayer oi dedication: There’s still a chance to win, 
but let me be the only victim. . . . 

It was strange — she thought, in the days that followed, looking at 
the men around her — that catastrophe had made them aware of 
Hank Rearden with an intensity that his achievements had not 
aroused, as it the paths of their consciousness were open to disaster, 
but not to value. Some spoke of him in shrill curses -others whis- 
pered, with a look of guilt and terror, as if a nameless retribution 
were now to descend upon them— some tried, with hysterical eva- 
' siveness, to act as if nothing had happened. 

The newspapers, like puppets on tangled strings, were shouting 
with the same belligerence and on the same dates: “It is social trea- 
son to ascribe too much importance to Hank Reardon’s desertion 
and to undermine public morale by the old-fashioned belief that an 
individual can be of any significance to society.” “It is social treason 
to spread rumors about the disappearance of Hank Rearden, Mi. 
Rearden has not disappeared, he is in his office, running his mills, 
as usual, and there has been no trouble at Rearden Steel, except a 
minor disturbance, a private scuffle among some workers.” “It is 
social treason to cast an unpatriotic light upon the tragic loss of 
Hank Rearden, Mr. Rearden has not deserted, he was killed in an 
automobile accident on his way to work, and this gricf-strickcn family 
has insisted on a private funeral.” j 

It was strange, she thought, to obtain ne^s by means of nothing 
but denials, as if existence had ceased, facts had vanished and only 
the frantic negatives uttered by officials and columnists gave any clue 
to the reality they were denying. “It is not true that the Miller Steel 
Foundry of New Jersey has gone out of business.” “It is not true 
that the Jansen Motor Company of Michigan has closed its doors.” 
“It is a vicious, anti-social lie that manufacturers of steel products 

916 



are collapsing under the threat of a steel shortage. There is no reason 
to expect a steel shortage/’ “U is a slanderous, unfounded rumor 
that a Steel Unification Plan had been in the making and that it had 
been favored by Mr. Orren Boyle. Mr. Boyle’s attorney has issued 
an emphatic denial and has assured the press that Mr. Boyle is now 
vehemently opposed to any such plan. Mr. Boyle, at the moment, is 
suffering from a nervous breakdown.” 

But some news could be witnessed in the streets of New York, in 
the cold, dank twilight of autumn evenings: a crowd gathered in front 
of a hardware store, where the owner had thrown the doors open, 
inviting people to help themselves to the last of his meager stock, 
while he laughed in shrieking sobs and went smashing his plate-glass 
windows —a crowd gathered at the door of a run-down apartment 
house, where a police ambulance stood waiting, while the bodies of 
a man, his wife and their three children were being removed from 
a gas-filled room; the man had been a small manufacturer of steel 
castings. 

If they see Hank Reardcn’s value now— she thought — why didn't 
they see it sooner? Why hadn't they averted their own doom and 
spared him his years of thankless torture? She found no answer. 

In the silence of sleepless nights, she thought that Hank Rearden 
and she had now changed places, he was in Atlantis and she was 
locked out by a screen ot light — he was, perhaps, calling to her as 
she had called to his struggling airplane, but no signal could reach 
her through that screen. 

Yet the screen split open tor one brief break — for the length of a 
letter she received a week after he vanished. The envelope bore no 
return address, only the postmark of some hamlet in Colorado. The 
letter contained two sentences: 

I have met him. I don’t blame you. 

H. R. 

She sat still for a long time, looking at the letter, as if unable to 
move or to feel. She felt nothing, she thought, then noticed that her 
shoulders were trembling in a faint, continuous shudder, then 
grasped that the tearing violence within her was made of an exultant 
tribute, of gratitude and of despair — her tribute to the victory that 
the meeting tit these two men implied, the final victory of both — her 
gratitude thai those in Atlantis still regarded her as one of them and 
had granted her the exception of receiving a message — the despair 
of the knowledge that her blankness was a struggle not to hear the 
questions she was now hearing. Had Galt abandoned her? Had he 
gone to the valley to meet his greatest conquest? Would he come 
back? Had he given her up? The unendurable was not that these 
questions had no answer, but that the answer was so simply, so easily 
within her reach and that she had no right to take a step to reach it. 

She had made no attempt to see him. Every morning, for a month* 
on entering her office, she had been conscious, not of the room 
around her, but of the tunnels below, under the floors of the build- 
ing — and she had worked, feeling as if some marginal part of her 
brain was computing figures, reading reports, making decisions in a 
rush of lifeless activity, while her living mind was inactive and still, 

917 



frozen in contemplation, forbidden to move beyond the sentence: 
He's down there. The only inquiry she had permitted herself had 
been a glance at the payroll list of the Terminal workers. She had 
seen the name: Galt, John, The list had carried it, openly, for over 
twelve years. She had seen an address next to the name — and, for a 
month, had struggled to forget it. 

It had seemed hard to live through that month — yet now, as she 
looked at the letter, the thought that Galt had gone was still harder 
to bear. Even the struggle of resisting his proximity had been a link 
to him, a price to pay, a victory achieved in his name. Now there 
was nothing, except a question that was not to be asked. His presence 
in the tunnels had been her motor through those days— just as his 
presence in the city had been her motor through the months of that 
summer — just as his presence somewhere in the world had been her 
motor through the years before she ever heard his name. Now she 
felt as if her motor, too, had stopped. 

She went on, with the bright, puie glitter ot a five dollar gold 
piece, which she kept in her pocket, as her last drop of luel. She 
went on, protected from the world around her by a last armor: 
indifference. 

The newspapers did not mention the outbreaks of violence that 
had begun to burst across the country — but she watched them 
through the reports of train conductors about bullet-riddled cars, 
dismantled tracks, attacked trains, besieged stations, in Nebraska, in 
Oregon, m Texas, in Montana — the futile, doomed outbreaks, 
prompted by nothing but despair, ending in nothing but destruction. 
Some were the explosions of local gangs; some spread wider, '('here 
were districts that rose in blind rebellion, arrested the local officials, 
expelled the agents of Washington, killed the tax collectors— then, 
announcing their secession from the country, went on to the final 
extreme of the very evil that had destroyed them, as if lighting mur- 
der with suicide: went on tp seize all property within their reach, to 
declare community bondage of all to all, and to perish within a week, 
their meager loot consumed, in the bloody hatred of all tor all, in 
the chaos of no rules save that of the gun, to perish under the lethar- 
gic thrust of a few worn soldiers sent out from Washington to bring 
order to the ruins. 

The newspapers did not mention tt. The editorials went on speak- 
ing of self-denial as the road to future progress, of self-sacrifice as 
the moral imperative, of greed as the enemy, of love as the solu- 
tion — their threadbare phrases as sickcningly sweet as the odor of 
ether in a hospital. 

Rumors went spreading through the cour^try in whispers of cynical 
terror — yet people read the newspapers ant| acted as if they believed 
what they read, each competing with the ofhers on who would keep 
most blindly silent, each pretending that hie did not know what he 
knew, each striving to believe that the unnamed was the unreal. It 
was as if a volcano were cracking open, ypt the people at the foot 
of the mountain ignored the sudden fissures, the black fumes, the 
boiling trickles, and went on believing that their only danger was to 
acknowledge the reality of these signs. 

918 



“Listen to Mr. Thompson’s report on the world crisis, November 
22 !” 

it was the first acknowledgment of the unacknowledged. The an* 
nouncemcnts began to appear a week in advance and went ringing 
across the country. “Mr. Thompson will give the people a report on 
the world crisis! Listen to Mr. Thompson on every radio station and 
television channel at 8 pm , on November 22!“ 

First, the front pages of the newspapers and the shouts of the 
radio voices had explained it: "To counteract the fears and rumors 
spread by the enemies of the people, Mr. Thompson will address the 
country on November 22 and will give us a full report on the slate 
of the world in this solemn moment of global crisis. Mr. Thompson 
will put an end to those sinister forces whose purpose is to keep us 
m terror and despair. He will bring light into the darkness of the 
world and will show us the way out of our tragic problems — a stern 
way, as befits the gravity of this hour, but a way of glory, as granted 
by the rebirth o! light. Mr. Thompson’s address will be carried by 
every radio station in this country and in all countries throughout 
the world, wherever radio waves may still be heard.” 

Then the chorus broke loose and went growing day by day. “Listen 
to Mr. Thompson on November 22’“ said daily headlines. “Don't 
torget Mr. Thompson on November 22!“ cried radio stations at the 
end of every program. "Mr. T hompson will tell you the truth!" said 
placards in subways and buses — then posters on the walls of build- 
ings then billboards on deserted highways. 

“Don't despair 1 Listen to Mr Thompson!” Said pennants on gov- 
ernment cars. “Don’t give up! Listen to Mr. Thompson*” said ban- 
ners in offices and shops. “Have faith’ Listen to Mr. Thompson!” 
said voices in churches. “Mr. Thompson will give you the answer!” 
wrote army airplanes across the sky. the letters dissolving in space, 
and only the last two words remaining by the time the sentence 
was completed. 

Public loud-speakers were built in the squares ot New York for 
the day of the speech, and came to rasping life once an hour, in 
time with the ringing ot distant clocks, to send over the worn rattle 
of the traffic, over the heads ot the shabby crowd, the sonorous, 
mechanical cry of an alarm-toned voice* “Listen to Mr. Thompson's 
report on the world crisis, November 22’“ — a cry rolling through the 
frosted air and vanishing among the foggy roof tops, under the blank 
page of a calendar that bore no date. 

On the afternoon of November 22, James Taggart told Dagny that 
Mr. Thompson wished to meet her for a conference before the 
broadcast. 

“In Washington?” she asked incredulously, glancing at her watch. 

“Well. I must say that you haven’t been reading the newspapers 
or keeping track of important events. Don’t you know that Mr, 
Thompson is to broadcast from New York? He has come here to 
confer with the leaders of industry, as well as of labor, science, the 
professions, and the best of the country’s leadership in general. He 
has requested that 1 bring you to the conference.” 

“Where is it to be held?” 


91 <) 



“At the broadcasting studio.” 

“They don’t expect me to speak on the air in support of their 
policies, do they?” 

“Don’t worry, they wouldn't let vow near a microphone! They just 
want to hear your opinion, and you can’t refuse, not m a national 
emergency, not when it's an invitation from Mr, Thompson in per- 
son!'’ He spoke impatiently, avoiding her eyes. 

“When is that conference to be held?” 

“At seven-thirty.” 

“Not much time to give a conference about a national emergency, 
is it?” 

“Mr. Thompson is a very busy man. Now please don’t argue, don’t 
start being difficult, I don’t see what you’re — ” 

“All right,” she said indifferently, ‘Til come,” and added, 
prompted by the kind at feeling that would have made her reluctant 
to venture without a witness into a conference ot gangsters, “but I’ll 
bring Eddie Willers along with me.” 

He frowned, considering it for a moment, with a look ot annoyance 
more than anxiety. “Oh. all right, if you wish,” he snapped, shrug- 
g*ng- 

She came to the broadcasting studio with James Taggart as a po- 
liceman at one side of her and Eddie Willers as a bodyguard at the 
other. Taggart’s face was resentful and tense, Eddie’s — resigned, yet 
wondering and curious. A stage set of pasteboard walls had been 
erected in a corner of the vast, dim space, representing a stiffly tradi- 
tional suggestion of a cross between a stately drawing room and a 
modest study. A semicircle of empty armchairs filled the set, sug- 
gesting a grouping from a family album, with microphones dangling 
like bait at the end of long poles extended for fishing among the 
chairs. 

The best leadership of the country, that stood about in nervous 
clusters, had the look of a remnant sale in a bankrupt store: she saw 
Wesley Mouch. Eugene Lawson, Chick Morrison, Tinky Holloway, 
Dr. Floyd Ferris, Dr. Simon Pritchett. Ma C halmers, Fred Kinnan. 
and a seedy handful of businessmen among whom the half-scared, 
half-flattered figure of Mr. Mowen of the Amalgamated Switch and 
Signal Company was, incredibly, intended to represent an indus- 
trial tycoon. 

But the figure that gave her an instant’s shock was Dr Robert 
Stadler, She had not known that a face could age so greatly within 
the brief space of one year: the look of timeless energy, of boyish 
eagerness, was gone, and nothing remained of the face except the 
lines of contemptuous bitterness. He stood alone, apart from the 
others, and she saw the moment when his eyesisaw her enter; he looked 
like a man in a whorehouse who had accepted the nature of his 
surroundings until suddenly caught there b^ his wife: it was a look 
of guilt in the process of becoming hatred! Then she saw Robert 
Stadler, the scientist, turn away as if he had not seen her — as if his 
refusal to see could wipe a fact out of existence. 

Mr. Thompson was pacing among the groups, snapping at random 
bystanders in the restless manner of a man of action who feels con- 

920 



tempt for the duly of making speeches. He was clutching a sheaf of 
typewritten pages, as if it were a bundle of old clothing about to 
be discarded. 

James Taggart caught him in mid-step, to say uncertainly and 
loudly, “Mr. Thompson, may 1 present my sister. Miss Dagny 
Taggart?" 

“So nice of you to come. Miss Taggart." said Mr. Thompson, shak- 
ing her hand as if she were another voter from back home whose 
name he had never heard before; then he marched briskly off. 

“Where's the conference, Jim?’' she asked, and glanced at the 
clock: it was a huge white dial with a black hand slicing the minutes, 
like a knife moving toward the hour ol eight. 

"I can't help it! I don't run this show!” he snapped. 

Eddie Willers glanced at her with a look of bitterly patient as- 
tonishment, and stepped closer to her side. 

A radio receiver was playing a program of military marches broad- 
cast from another studio, baif-drowning the fragments of nervous 
voices, of hastily aimless steps, of screeching machinery being pulled 
to focus upon the drawing-room set. 

“Stay tuned to hear Mr. Thompson's report on the world crisis at 
eight pm !” cried the martial voice of an announce!, from the radio- 
receiver -when the hand on the dial reached the hour ol 7:45. 

“Step on it, boys, step on it!” snapped Mr. Thompson, while the 
radio burst into another march. 

It was 7:50 when C hick Morrison, the Morale Conditioner, who 
seemed to be in charge, cried. “All right, boys and girls, all right, 
let's take our places!” waving a bunch of notepaper, like a baton, 
toward the light-flooded circle of atmehairs, 

Mr. Thompson thudded down upon the central chair, m the man- 
ner of grabbing a vacant seat in a subway. 

Chick Morrison's assistants were herding the crowd toward the 
circle of light 

“A happy family,” ( hick Morrison explained, “the count! y must 
see us as a big, united, happy — What's the matter with that thing?*' 
The radio music had gone off abruptly, choking on an odd little gasp 
ol static, cut in the middle of a ringing phrase. It was 7:51. He 
shiugged and went on: “ — happy family. Hurry up. boys. Take close- 
ups of Mr Thompson, first.” 

The hand of the dock went slicing off the minutes, while press 
photographers clicked their cameras at Mr. Thompson’s sourly impa- 
tient face. 

“Mr. Thompson will sit between science and industry!” Chick 
Morrison announced. "Dr. Stadler, please — the chair on Mr. Thomp- 
son's left. Miss Taggart — this way, please — on Mr. Thompson's 
right.” 

Dr. Stadler obeyed. She did not move. 

“It's not just for the press, it’s for the television audiences,” Chick 
Morrison explained to her, in the tone of an inducement. 

She made a step forward. “I will not take part in this program,” 
she said evenly, addressing Mr. Thompson. 

“You won't?” he asked blankly, with the kind of look he would 

921 



have worn if one of the flower vases had suddenly refused! to perform 
its parts. 

“Dagny, for Christs sake!” cried James Taggart in panic. 

“What's the matter with her?” asked Mr. Thompson. 

“But, Miss Taggart! Why?” cried Chick Morrison. 

“You all know why,” she said to the faces around her. “You 
should have known better than to try that again.” 

“Miss Taggart!” yelled Chick Morrison, as she turned to go. “It's 
a national emer— ” 

Then a man came rushing toward Mr. Thompson, and she stopped, 
as did everyone else — and the look on the man's face swept the 
crowd info an abruptly total silence. He was the station’s chief engi- 
neer, and it was odd to see a look of primitive terror struggling 
against his remnant of civilized control. 

“Mr. Thompson.” he said, “we . . we might have to delay the 

broadcast.” 

“ What ?" cried Mr. Thompson. 

The hand of the dial stood at 7:58. 

“We re trying to fix it. Mr. Thompson, we’re trying to find out 
what it is . . . but we might not be on time and — ” 

“What are you talking about? What happened?” 

“We're trying to locate the — ” 

“What happened?” 

“I don't know! But . . . We . . we can't get on the air, Mr 

ITiompson.” 

There was a moment of silence, then Mr. Thompson asked, his 
voice unnaturally low. “Are you crazy 9 ” 

“l must be 1 wish 1 were. 1 can’t make it out. The station is dead ” 

“Mechanical trouble?” yelled Mr. Thompson, leaping to his feet 
“Mechanical trouble, God damn you, at a time like this? It that's 
how you run this station—” 

The chief engineer shook his head slowly, m the manner of an 
adult who is reluctant to frighten a child. “It's not this station, Mr 
Thompson.” he said softly. “It’s every station in the country, as fai 
as we’ve been able to check. And there is no mechanical trouble 
Neither here nor elsewhere. The equipment is in order, in perfect 
order, and they all report the same, but . . . but all radio stations went 
off the air at seven-fifty -one, and . . . and nobody can discover why." 

“But — ” cried Mr. Thompson, stopped, glanced about him and 
screamed, “Not tonight! You can't let it happen tonight! You’ve got 
to get me on the air!” 

“Mr. Thompson,” the man said slowly, ^we’ve called the electronic 
laboratory of the State Science Institute; They . . . they’ve never 
seen anything like it. They said it might be a natural phenomenon, 
some sort ot cosmic disturbance o i an unprecedented kind, only — " 

“Well?” 

“Only they don't think it is. We don’t* either. They said it looks 
like radio waves, but of a frequency never produced before, never 
observed anywhere, never discovered by anybody.” 

No one answered him. In a moment, he went on, his voice oddly 

922 



solemn: '‘It looks like a wall of radio waves jamming the air, and 
we can’t get through it, we can t touch it, we can’t break it . . . 
What’s more, we can’t locate its source, not by any of our usual 
methods. . . Those waves seem to come from a transmitter that . . . 
that makes any known to us look like a child's toy!” 

“But that’s not possible!” The cry came from behind Mr. Thomp- 
son and they all whirled in its direction, startled by its note of pecu- 
liar terror; it came from Dr. Stadier. “There's no such thing! There’s 
nobody on earth to make it!” 

The chief engineer spread his hands out. “ That’s it. Dr Stadier,” 
he said wearily. “It can't be possible It shouldn’t be possible. But 
theie it is.” 

'Well, do something about it!” cried Mr. Thompson to the crowd 
at large. 

No one answered or moved. 

“I won’t permit this!” cried Mr. Thompson “I won't permit it! 
Tonight of all nights’ I've got to make that speech! Do something! 
Solve it, whatever it is’ 1 order you to solve it!” 

The chief engineer was looking at him blankly. 

“I’ll tire the lot ot you for this! I’ll lire every electronic engineer 
in the country! I'll put the whole profession on trial for sabotage, 
desertion and treason! Do you hear me*’ Now do something. God 
damn you! Do something!” 

I he chiet engineer was looking at him impassively, as if words 
weie not conveying anything any longer. 

“Isn't there anybody to obey an order?” cried Mr. Thompson, 
isn't there a brain left in this country 0 ' 

The hand of the clock reached the "dot of 8:(X) 

“Ladies and gentlemen,” said a voice that came from the radio 
icceivcr — a man’s clear, calm, implacable voice, the kind of voice 
that had not been heard on the airwaves for years — “Mr. Thompson 
will not speak to you tonight His time is up. 1 have taken it over. 
You were to hear a report on the world crisis. That is what you are 
going to hear.” 

lhree gasps of recognition greeted the voice, but nobody had the 
power to notice them among the sounds of the crowd, which were 
beyond the stage of cries. One was a gasp of triumph, another — of 
terror, the third — of bewilderment. Three persons had recognized 
i he speaker: Dagny, Dr. Stadier. Eddie W tilers. Nobody glanced at 
Eddie Willers; but Dagny and Dr. Stadier glanced at each other. She 
saw that his face was distorted by as evil a terror as one could ever 
bear to see; he saw that she knew and that the way she looked at 
him was as if the speaker had slapped his tace. 

“For twelve years, you have been asking: Who is John Galt? This 
ts John Galt speaking. 1 am the man who loves hts life. 1 am the 
man who does not sacrifice his love or his values. I am the man who 
has deprived you of victims and thus has destroyed your world, and 
if you -wish to know why you are perishing— you who dread knowl- 
edge — l am the man who will now tell you.” 

The chief engineer was the only one able to move; he ran to a 
television set and struggled frantically with its dials. But the screen 

923 



remained empty; the speaker had not chosen to be seen. Only his 
voice filled the airways of the country — of the world, thought the 
chief engineer — sounding as if he were speaking here, in this room, 
not to a group, but to one man; it was not the tone of addressing a 
meeting, but the tone of addressing a mind. 

“You have heard it said that this is an age of moral crisis. You 
have said it yourself, half in fear, half in hope that the words had 
no meaning. You have cried that man’s sins are destroying the world 
and you have cursed human nature for its unwillingness to practice 
the virtues you demanded. Since virtue, to you, consists of sacrifice, 
you have demanded more sacrifices at every successive disaster. In 
the name of a return to morality, you have sacrificed all those evils 
which you held as the cause of your plight. You have sacrificed 
justice to mercy. You have sacrificed independence to unity. You 
have sacrificed reason to faith. You have sacrificed wealth to need. 
You have sacrificed self-esteem to self-denial. You have sacrificed 
happiness to duty. 

“You have destroyed all that which you held to be evil and 
achieved all that which you held to be good. Why, then, do you 
shrink in horror from the sight of the world around you? That world 
is not the product of your sins, it is the product and the image nt 
your virtues. It is your moral ideal brought into reality in its full and 
final perfection. You have fought for it, you have dreamed of it. 
and you have wished it. and I — I am the man who has granted you 
your wish. 

“Your ideal had an implacable enemy, which your code of morality 
was designed to destroy. I have withdrawn that enemy. I have taken it 
out of your way and out of your reach. I have removed the source 
of all those evils you w'ere sacrificing one by one. I have ended your 
battle. I have stopped your motor. I have deprived your world ot 
man’s mind. 

“Men do not live by the mind, you say? 1 have withdrawn those who 
do. The mind is impotent, you say? I have withdrawn those whose 
mind isn’t. There are values higher than the mind, you say? I have 
withdrawn those for whom there aren’t. 

“While you were dragging to your sacrificial altars the men ot 
justice, of independence, of reason, of wealth, of sell-esteem — I beat 
you to it, I reached them first. 1 told them the nature of the game 
you were playing and the nature of that moral code of yours, which 
they had been too innocently generous to grasp. I showed them the 
way to live by another morality — mine. It is mine that they chose 
to follow. 

“All the men who have vanished, the ipen you hated, yet dreaded 
to lose, it is I who have taken them awaj| from you. Do not attempt 
to find us. We do not choose to be foun|i. Do not cry that it is our 
duty to serve you. We do not recognize ^uch duty. Do not cry that 
you need us. We do not consider need a|claim. Do not cry that you 
own us. You don’t. Do not beg us to return. We are on strike, we, 
the men of the mind. 

“We are on strike against self-immolation. We are on strike 
against the creed of unearned rewards and unrewarded duties. Wc 

924 



are on strike against the dogma that the pursuit of one’s happiness 
is evil. We are on strike against the doctrine that life is guilt. 

“There is a difference between our strike and all those you’ve 
practiced for centuries: our strike consists, not of making demands, 
hut of granting them. We are evil, according to your morality. We 
have chosen not to harm you any longer. We are useless, according 
to your economics. We have chosen not to exploit you any longer. 
We are dangerous and to be shackled, according to your politics. 
We have chosen not to endanger you, nor to wear the shackles any 
longer. We are only an illusion, according to your philosophy. We 
have chosen not to blind you any longer and have left you free to 
lace reality — the reality you wanted, the world as you see it now. a 
world without mind. 

“Wc have granted you everything you demanded of us, we who 
had always been the givers, but have only now understood it. We 
have no demands to present to you. no terms to bargain about, 
no compromise to leach. You have nothing to offer us We do not 
need you . 

“Arc you now crying: No, this was not what you wanted? A mind- 
less world of ruins was not your goal'/ You did not want us to leave 
you? You moral cannibals. 1 know that you’ve always known what 
it was that you wanted But your game is up. because now we know' 
it, loo. 

“Through centuries of scourges and disasteis, brought about by 
vour code of morality, you have cried that your code had been bro- 
ken. that the scourges were punishment for breaking it. that men 
were too weak and too selfish to spill all the blooii it required. You 
damned man, you damned existence, you damned this earth, but 
never dared to question your code. Your victims took the blame and 
snuggled on, with your cuises as reward lor their martyrdom — while 
you went on crying that youi code was noble, but human nature was 
not good enough to practice it. And no one rose to ask the question: 
Good? — by what standard? 

“You wanted to know John Galt's identity I am the man who has 
asked that question. 

“Yes, this is an age of moral crisis. Yes, you are bearing punish- 
ment for your evil. But it is not man who is now on trial and it is 
not human nature that will take the blame. It is your moral code 
that’s through, this time. Your moral code has reached its climax, 
the blind alley at the end of its course. And if you wish to go on 
living, what you now need is not to return to morality — you who 
have never known any - but to discover it. 

“You have heard no concepts of morality but the mystical or the 
social. You have been taught that morality is a code of behavior 
imposed on you by whim, the whim of a supernatural power or the 
whim of society, to serve God’s purpose or your neighbor’s well are, 
to please an authority beyond the grave or else next door — but not 
to serve your life or pleasure. Your pleasure, you have been taught, 
is to be found in immorality, your interests would best be served by 
<wil, and any moral code must be designed not for you. but against 
you, not to further your life, but to drain it. 

925 



“For centuries, the battle of morality was fought between those 
who claimed that your life belongs to God and those who claimed 
that it belongs to your neighbors — between those who preached that 
the good is self-sacrifice for the sake of ghosts in heaven and those 
who preached that the good is self-sacrifice for the sake of incompe 
tents on earth. And no one came to say that your life belongs to 
you and that the good is to live it. 

“Both sides agreed that morality demands the surrender of your 
self-interest and of your mind, that the moral and the practical are 
opposites, that morality is not the province of reason, but the prov- 
ince of faith and force. Both sides agreed that no rational morality 
is possible, that there is no right or wrong in reason— that in reason 
there’s no reason to be moral. 

“Whatever else they fought about, it was against man’s mind that 
all your moralists have stood united. It was man's mind that all their 
schemes and systems were intended to despoil and destroy. Now 
choose to perish or to iearn that the anti-mind is the anti-life. 

“Man’s mind is his basic tool of survival. Life is given to him. 
survival is not. His body is given to him, its sustenance is not. His 
mind is given to him, its content is not. To remain alive, he must 
act, and before he can act he must know the nature and purpose ol 
his action. He cannot obtain his food without a knowledge of food 
and of the way to obtain it. He cannot dig a ditch — or build a cyclo- 
tron — without a knowledge of his aim and ot the means to achieve 
it. To remain alive, he must think. 

“But to think is an act of choice. The key to what you so reckless!} 
call ‘human nature,’ the open secret you live with, yet dread to name, 
is the fact that man is a being of volitional consciousness . Reason 
does not work automatically; thinking is not a mechanical process, 
the connections of logic arc not made by instinct. The function ol 
your stomach, lungs or heart is automatic; the function of your mind 
is not. In any hour and issue ol your life, you are free to think or 
to evade that effort. But you are not tree to escape from your nature, 
from the fact that reason is your means of survival — so that for you 
who are a human being, the question ‘to be or not to be* is the 
question ‘to think or not to think.’ 

“A being of volitional consciousness has no automatic course ot 
behavior. He needs a code ol values to guide his actions. ‘Value’ is 
that which one acts to gam and keep, ‘virtue’ is the action by which 
one gains and keeps it. ‘Value’ presupposes an answer to the ques- 
tion: of value to whom and for what? Value’ presupposes a standard, 
a purpose and the necessity of action in the face of an alternative 
Where there are no alternatives, no valujbs are possible. 

“There is only one fundamental alternative in the universe; exis 
tence or non-existence — and it pertains to a single class of entities 
to living organisms. The existence of inanimate matter is uncondi- 
tional, the existence of life is not; it depends on a specific course ol 
action. Matter is indestructible, it changes its forms, but it cannot 
cease to exist. It is only a living organism that faces a constant alter- 
native; the issue of life or death. Life is a process of self-sustaining 
and self-generated action. If an organism fails in that action, it dies, 

926 



its chemical elements remain, but its life goes out of existence. It is 
only the concept of ‘Life’ that makes the concept of ‘Value’ possible. 
It is only to a living entity that things can be good or evil. 

“A plant must feed itself in order to live; the sunlight, the water, 
the chemicals it needs are the values its nature has set it to pursue; 
its life is the standard of value directing its actions. Bui a plant has 
no choice of action; there are alternatives in the conditions it encoun- 
ters, but there is no alternative in its function: it acts automatically 
lo further its life, it cannot act for its own destruction. 

“An animal is equipped for sustaining its life; its senses provide 
it with an automatic code of action, an automatic knowledge of what 
is good for it or evil. It has no power to extend its knowledge or to 
evade it. In conditions where its knowledge proves inadequate, it 
dies. But so long as it lives, it acts on its knowledge, with automatic 
safety and no power of choice, it is unable to ignore its own good, 
unable to decide to choose the evil and act as its own destroyer. 

“Man has no automatic code of survival. His particular distinction 
jiom all other living species is the necessity to act m the lace of 
alternatives by means ol volitional choice He has no automatic 
knowledge of what is good for him or evil, vs hat values his life de- 
pends on, what course of action it requires Aie you prattling about 
an instinct of self-preservation 9 An instinct of self-preservation is 
precisely what man does not possess An ‘instinct’ is an unerring and 
automatic form of knowledge A desire is not an instinct. A desire 
to live does not give you the knowledge required lor living. And 
even man’s desire to live is not automatic your secret evil today is 
that that is the desire you do not hold. Your fear of death is not a 
love of life and will not give you the knowledge needed to keep it. 
Man must obtain his knowledge and choose his actions by a process 
ot thinking, which nature will not force him to perform. Man has 
the power to act as his own destroyer — and that is the way he has 
acted through most of his history 

“A living entity that regarded its means of survival as evil, would 
not survive. A plant that stiuggled to mangle its roots, a bird that 
lought to break its wings would not remain for long in the existence 
they affronted. But the history of man has been a struggle to deny 
and to destroy his tnind. 

‘‘Man has been called a rational being, but rationality is a matter 
of choice — and the alternative his nature offers him is: rational being 
or suicidal animal. Man has to be man— by choice; he has to hold 
his life as a value — by choice; he has to learn to sustain it — by choice; 
he has to discover the values it requires and practice his virtues — 
by choice. 

“A code of values accepted by choice is a code of morality. 

“Whoever you are, you who are hearing me now, 1 am speaking 
lo whatever living remnant is left uncorrupted within you, to the 
remnant of the human, to your mind , and l say: There is a morality 
of reason, a morality proper to man, and Man's Life is its standard 
of value. 

“All that which is proper to the life of a rational being is the 
good; all that which destroys it is the evil. 

927 



“Man's life, as required by his nature, is not the life of a mindless 
brute, of a looting thug or a mooching mystic, but the life of a 
thinking being — not life by means of force or fraud, but life by means 
of achievement — not survival at any price, since there’s only one 
price that pays for man’s survival: reason. 

“Man’s life is the standard of morality, but your own life is its 
purpose. If existence on earth is your goal, you must choose your 
actions and values by the standard of that which is proper to man— 
for the purpose of preserving, fulfilling and enjoying the irreplaceable 
value which is your life. 

“Since life requires a specific course of action, any other course 
will destroy it. A being who does not hold his own life as the motive 
and goal of his actions, is acting on the motive and standard of death 
Such a being is a metaphysical monstrosity, struggling to oppose, 
negate and contradict the fact of his own existence, running blindly 
amuck on a trail of destruction, capable of nothing but pain. 

“Happiness is the successful stale of life, pain is an agent of death. 
Happiness is that state of consciousness which proceeds from the 
achievement of one’s values. A morality that dares to tell you to 
find happiness in the renunciation of your happiness — to value the 
failure of yout values — is an insolent negation of morality A doc 
trine that gives you, as an ideal, the role of a sacrificial animal seek- 
ing slaughter on the altars of others, is giving you death as your 
standard. By the grace of reality and the nature of life, man- -even 
man — is an end in himself, he exists for his own sake, and the 
achievement of his own happiness is his highest moral purpose. 

“But neither life nor happiness can be achieved by the pursuit of 
irrational whims. Just as man is free to attempt to survive in any 
random manner, but will perish unless he lives as his nature requires, 
so he is free to seek his happiness in any mindless fraud, but the 
torture of frustration is all he will find, unless he seeks the happiness 
proper to man. The purpose of morality is to teach you. not to sultei 
and die, but to enjoy yourself and live. 

“Sweep aside -those parasites of subsidized classrooms, who live 
on the profits of the mind of others and proclaim that man needs 
no morality, no values, no code of behavior. They, who pose as 
scientists and claim that man is only an animal, do not grant him 
inclusion in the law of existence they have granted to the lowest of 
insects. They recognize that every living species has a way of survival 
demanded by its nature, they do not claim that a fish can live out 
of water or that a dog can live without its sense of smell— but man. 
they claim, the most complex of beings, man can survive in any wav 
whatever, man has no identity, no natut^, and there’s no practical 
reason why he cannot live with his mean^of survival destroyed, with 
his mind throttled and placed at the disposal of any orders they might 
care to issue. 

“Sweep aside those hatred-eaten mystfes, who pose as friends ot 
humanity and preach that the highest virtue man can practice is to 
hold his own life as of no value. Do they tell you that the purpose 
of morality is to curb man’s instinct of self-preservation? It is for 

928 



the purpose of self-preservation that man needs a code of morality. 
The only man who desires to be moral is the man who desires to live. 

“No, you do not have to live; it is your basic act of choice; but if 
you choose to live, you must live as a man— by the work and the 
judgment of your mind. 

“No, you do not have to live as a man; it is an act of moral choice. 
But you cannot live as anything else— and the alternative is that 
state of living death which you now see within you and around you, 
the state of a thing unfit for existence, no longer human and less 
than animal, a thing that knows nothing but pain and drags itself 
through its span of years in the agony of unthinking self-destruction. 

“No, you do not have to think; it is an act of moral choice. But 
someone had to think to keep you alive, if you choose to default, 
you default on existence and you pass the deficit to some moral man, 
expecting him to sacrifice his good for the sake of letting you survive 
by your evil. 

“No, you do not have to be a man; but today those who are, 
are not there any longei. I have removed your means of survival — 
\our victims. 

“It you wish to know how 1 have done it and what 1 told them 
to make them quit, you are hearing it now 1 told them, in essence, 
the statement I am making tonight. They were men who had lived 
by my code, but had not known how great a virtue it represented. 

I made them see it. I brought them, not a re-evaluation, but only an 
identification of their values. 

“We, the men of the mind, are now on strike against you in the 
name ol a single axiom, which is the root ol our moral code, just as 
the root of yours is the wish to escape it. the axiom that existence 
exists. 

“Existence exists— and the act ot grasping that statement implies 
two corollary axioms, that something exists which one perceives and 
that one exists possessing consciousness, consciousness being the fac- 
ulty of perceiving that which exists 

“If nothing exists, there can be no consciousness; a consciousness 
with nothing to be conscious of is a conti adiction in terms. A con- 
sciousness conscious of nothing but itself is a contradiction in terms: 
before it could identify itself as consciousness, it had to be conscious 
of something. If that which you claim to perceive does not exist, 
what you possess is not consciousness. 

“Whatever the degree of your knowledge, these two — existence 
and consciousness — are axioms you cannot escape, these two are the 
irreducible primaries implied in any action you undertake, in any 
part of your knowledge and in its sum, from the first ray of light 
you perceive at the start of your life to the widest erudition you 
might acquire at its end. Whether you know the shape of a pebble 
or the structure of a solar system, the axioms remain the same: that 
it exists and that you know it. 

“To exist is to be something, as distinguished from the nothing of 
non-existence* it is to be an entity of a specilic nature made of spe- 
cific attributes. Centuries ago. the man who was — no matter what 
his errors — the greatest of your philosophers, has stated the formula 

929 



defining the concept of existence and the rule of all knowledge: A 
is A. A thing is itself. You have never grasped the meaning of his 
statement. I am here to complete it: Existence is Identity, Conscious- 
ness is Identification. 

“Whatever you choose to consider, be it an object, an attribute or 
an action, the law of identity remains the same. A leaf cannot be a 
stone at the same time, it cannot be all red and all green at the same 
time, it cannot free?e and burn at the same time. A is A. Or, if you 
wish it stated in simpler language: You cannot have your cake and 
eat it, too. 

“Are you seeking to know what is wrong with the world? All the 
disasters that have wrecked your world, came from your leaders' 
attempt to evade the fact that A is A All the secret evil you dread 
to face within you and all the pain you have ever endured, came 
from your own attempt to evade the fact that A is A. The purpose 
of those who taught you to evade it, was to make you forget that 
Man is Man. 

“Man cannot survive except by gaining knowledge, and reason is 
his only means to gain it, Reason is the faculty that perceives, identi- 
fies and integrates the material provided by his senses. The task of 
his senses is to give him the evidence of existence, but the task of 
identifying it belongs to his reason; his senses tell him only that 
something is , but what it is must be learned by his mind 

“All thinking is a process of identification and integration. Man 
perceives a blob of color; by integrating the evidence of his sight 
and his touch, he learns to identify it as a solid object; he learns to 
identify the object as a table; he learns that the table is made ot 
wood; he learns that the wood consists ot cells, that the cells consist 
of molecules, that the molecules consist of atoms. All through this 
process, the work of his mind consists of answers to a single question: 
What is it? His means to establish the truth of his answers is logic, 
and logic rests on the axiom that existence exists. Logic is the art of 
non-contradictory identification. A contradiction cannot exist. An 
atom is itself, and so is the universe: neither can contradict its own 
identity; nor can a part contradict the whole. No concept man forms 
is valid unless he integrates it without contradiction into the total 
sum of his knowledge. To arrive at a contradiction is to confess an 
error in one’s thinking; to maintain a contradiction is to abdicate 
one’s mind and to evict oneself from the realm of reality. 

“Reality is that which exists; the unreal does not exist; the unreal 
is merely that negation of existence which is the content of a human 
consciousness when it attempts to abandon reason. Truth is the rec- 
ognition of reality; reason, man’s only m6ans of knowledge, is his 
only standard of truth. 

“The most depraved sentence you can rfow utter is to ask: Whose 
reason? The answer is: Yours. No matter how vast your knowledge 
or how modest, it is your own mind that fias to acquire it. It is only 
with your own knowledge that you can $eal. It is only your own, 
knowledge that you can claim to possess or ask others to consider. 
Your mind is your only judge of truth — and if others dissent from 
your verdict, reality is the court of final appeal. Nothing but a man’s 

930 



nund can perform that complex, delicate, crucial process of identifi- 
cation which is thinking. Nothing can direct the process but his own 
judgment. Nothing can direct his judgment but his moral integrity. 

“You who speak ot a ‘moral instinct 1 as ii it were some separate 
endowment opposed to reason-man’s reason is his moral faculty. 
A process of reason is a process of constant choice in answer to the 
..ueslion: True or False ? — Right or Wrong? Is a seed to be planted 

I soil in order to grow— right or wrong? Is a man's wound to be 
isintected in order to save his life— right or wrong? Does the nature 
f atmospheric electricity permit it to be converted into kinetic 
ower — right or wrong? It is the answers to such questions that gave 
ou everything you have — and the answers came from a man’s mind, 
mind of intransigent devotion to that which is right. 

"A iational process is a moral process. You may make an error 
t any step of it, with nothing to protect you but your own severity. 
n vou may try to cheat, to fake the evidence and evade the effort 
•f the quest — but if devotion to truth is the hallmark of morality, 
hen there is no greater, nobler, more heroic form ol devotion than the 
cl of a man who assumes the responsibility of thinking. 

“That which you call your soul or spirit is your consciousness, and 
hat which you call ‘free will* is your mind’s ireedom to think or 
ot. the only will you have, your only freedom, the choice that controls 

II the choices you make and determines your life and your character, 
“Thinking is man’s only basic virtue, from which all the others 

nococd. And his basic vice, the source of all his evils, is that name- 
w’ns act which all of you practice, but struggle never to admit: the 
.cl of blanking out, the willful suspension of one’s consciousness, 
he refusal to think — not blindness, but the refusal to sec: not igno- 
ance, but the refusal to know. It is the act of unfoeusing your mind 
md inducing an inner fog to escape the responsibility of judgment — 
>n the unstated premise that a thing will not exist if only you refuse 
o identify it, that A will not be A so long as you do not pronounce 
he verdict ‘It is.' Non-thinking is an act of annihilation, a wish to 
legate existence, an attempt to wipe out reality. But existence exists; 
eality is not to be wiped out, it will merely wipe out the wiper. By 
efusing to say Tt is,’ you are refusing to say ‘I am.’ By suspending 
our judgment, you arc negating your person. When a man declares: 
Who am I to know?’ — he is declaring: Who am I to live?’ 

‘This, in every hour and every issue, is your basic moral choice: 
hulking or non-thinking, existence or non-existencc. A or non-A, 
nlity or zero. 

“To the extent to which a man is rational, life is the premise 
hrecting his actions To the extent to which he is irrational, the 
^remise directing his actions is death. 

’’You who prattle that morality is social and that man would need 
to morality on a desert island — it is on a desert island that he would 
teed it most. Let him try to claim, when there are no victims to pay 
or it, that a rock is a house, that sand is clothing, that food will 
frop into his mouth without cause or effort, that he will collect a 
tarvest tomorrow by devouring his stock seed today — and reality 
*ill wipe him out, as he deserves: reality will show him that life is 

931 



a value to be bought and that thinking is the only coin noble enough 
to buy it. 

“If I were to speak your kind of language, 1 would say that man’s 
only moral commandment is: Thou shalt think. But a ‘moral com- 
mandment’ is a contradiction in terms. The moral is the chosen, not 
the forced: the understood, not the obeyed. The moral is the rational, 
and reason accepts no commandments. 

“My morality, the morality of reason, is contained in a single 
axiom: existence exists — and in a single choice: to live. The rest pro- 
ceeds from these. To live, man must hold three things as the supreme 
and ruling values of his life: Reason — Purpose — Self-esteem. Reason, 
as his only tool of knowledge — Purpose, as his choice of the happi- 
ness which that tool must proceed to achieve — Self-esteem, as hi> 
inviolate certainty that his mind is competent to think and his person 
is worthy of happiness, which means: is worthy of living. These three 
values imply and require all of man’s virtues, and all his virtues 
pertain to the relation of existence and consciousness: rationality, 
independence, integrity, honesty, justice, productiveness, pride. 

“Rationality is the recognition ol the fact that existence exists, 
that nothing can alter the truth and nothing can take precedence 
over that act of perceiving it, which is thinking — that the mind is 
one’s only judge of values and one’s only guide of action — that rea- 
son is an absolute that permits no compromise — that a concession 
to the irrational invalidates one’s consciousness and turns it from the 
task of perceiving to the task of faking reality — that the alleged 
short-cut to knowledge, which is faith, is only a short-circuit destroy 
ing the mind — that the acceptance of a mystical invention is a wish 
for the annihilation of existence and, properly, annihilates one’s 
consciousness. 

‘ Independence is the recognition of the fact that yours is the re- 
sponsibility of judgment and nothing can help you escape it— that 
no substitute can do your thinking, as no pinch-hitter can live your 
life — that the vilest form of self-abasement and self-destruction is the 
subordination of your mind to the mind of another, the acceptance ol 
an authority over your brain, the acceptance of his assertions as 
facts, his say-so as truth, his edicts as middle-man between your 
consciousness and your existence. 

“Integrity is the recognition of the fact that you cannot fake your 
consciousness, just as honesty is the recognition of the fact that you cannot 
fake existence — that man is an indivisible entity, an integrated unit of two 
attributes: of matter and consciousness, and that he may permit no breach 
between body and mind, between action and thought, between his life 
and his convictions— that, like a judge impervious to public opinion, he 
may not sacrifice his convictions to the wishes of others, be it the whole 
of mankind shouting pleas or threats against him — that courage and 
confidence are practical necessities, that Courage is the practical form 
of being true to existence, of being true tp truth, and confidence is the 
practical form of being true to one’s own consciousness. 

“Honesty is the recognition of the fact that the unreal is unreal 
and can have no value, that neither love nor fame nor cash is a value 
if obtained by fraud — that an attempt to gain a value by deceiving 

932 



the mind of others is an act of raising your victims to a position 
higher than reality, where you become a pawn of their blindness, a 
slave of their non-thinking and their evasions, while their intelli- 
gence, their rationality, their perceptive ness become the enemies you 
have to dread and flee — that you do nut care to live as a dependent, 
least of all a dependent on the stupidity of others, or as a fool whose 
source of values is the fools he succeeds in fooling — that honesty is 
not a social duly, not a sacrifice for the sake of others, but the most 
profoundly selfish virtue man can piactice: his refusal to sacrifice the 
reality of his own existence to the deluded consciousness of others. 

“Justice is the recognition of the fact that you cannot fake the 
character of men as you cannot fake the character of nature, that 
vou must judge all men as conscientiously as you judge inanimate 
objects, with the same respect for truth, with the same incorruptible 
Msion. by as pure and as rational a process of identification — that 
every man must be judged tor what he is and treated accordingly, 
that just as you do not pay a higher price for a rusty chunk of scrap 
than for a piece of shining metal, so you do not value a rotter above 
a hero— that your moral appraisal is the com paving men for their 
virtues or vices, and this payment demands of you as sciupulous an 
honor as you bring to financial transactions- -that to withhold your 
contempt from men’s vices is an act of moial counterfeiting, and 
to withhold your admiration from their viitues is an act of moral 
embezzlement— -that to place any other concern higher than justice 
is to devaluate your moral cunency and defraud the good in favor 
ol the evil, since only the good can lose by a default of justice and 
only the evil can profit — and that the bottom of the pit at the end 
o! that road, the act of moral bankruptcy, is lo punish men for their 
virtues and reward them lor their vices, that that is the collapse to 
lull depravity, the Hlack Mass of the worship of death, the dedication 
of your consciousness to the destruction of existence. 

“Productiveness is your acceptance 01 morality, your recognition 
of the fact that you choose to live— that productive work is the 
process by which man's consciousness controls hts existence, a con- 
stant process of acqmung knowledge and shaping matter to lit one’s 
purpose, of translating an idea into physical form, of remaking the 
earth in the image of one's values - that all work is creative work if 
done by a thinking mind, and no work is creative if done by a blank 
who repeats in uncritical stupor a routine he has learned from oth- 
eis — that your work is yours to choose, and the choice is as wide as 
your mind, that nothing more is possible to you and nothing less is 
human — that to cheat your way into a job bigger than your mind 
can handle is to become a fear-corroded ape on borrowed motions 
and borrowed time, and to settle down into a job that requires less 
than your mind’s full capacity is to cut your motor and sentence 
yourself to another kind of motion: decay— that your work is the 
pioeess of achieving your values, and to lose your ambition for values 
is to lose your ambition to live— that your body is a machine, but 
vour mind is its driver, and you must drive as far as your mind will 
take you, with achievement as the goal of your road— that the man 
who has no purpose is a machine that coasts downhill at the mercy 



of any boulder to crash in the first chance ditch, that the man who 
stifles his mind is a stalled machine slowly going to rust, that the 
man who lets a leader prescribe his course is a wreck being towed 
to the scrap heap, and the man who makes another man his goal is 
a hitchhiker no driver should ever pick up — that your work is the 
purpose of your life, and you must speed past any killer who assumes 
the right to stop you, that any value you might find outside your 
work, any other loyalty or love, can be only travelers you choose to 
share your journey and must be travelers going on their own power 
in the same direction. 

“Pride is the recognition of the fact that you are your own highest 
value and, like all of man’s values, it has to be earned— that of any 
achievements open to you, the one that makes all others possible is 
the creation of your own character — that your character, your ac- 
tions, your desires, your emotions are the products of the premises 
held by your mind — that as man must produce the physical values 
he needs to sustain his life, so he must acquire the values of character 
that make his life worth sustaining — that as man is a being of self- 
made wealth, so he is a being of self-made soul — that to live requires 
a sense of self-value, but man, who has no automatic values, has no 
automatic sense of self-esteem and must earn it by shaping his soul 
in the image of his moral ideal, in the image of Man, the rational 
being he is born able to create, but must create by choice — that the 
first precondition of self-esteem is that radiant selfishness of soul 
which desires the best in all things, in values of matter and spirit, a 
soul that seeks above all else to achieve its own moral perfection, 
valuing nothing higher than itself — and that the proot of an achieved 
self-esteem is your soul’s shudder of contempt and rebellion against 
the role of a sacrificial animal, against the vile impertinence of any 
creed that proposes to immolate the irreplaceable value which is your 
consciousness and the incomparable glory which is your existence to 
the blind evasions and the stagnant decay of others. 

“Are you beginning to see who is John Galt? I ant the man who 
has earned the thing you did not fight tor, the thing you have le- 
nounced, betrayed, corrupted, yet were unable fully to destroy and 
are now hiding as your guilty secret, spending your life in apologies 
to every professional cannibal, lest it be discovered that somewhere 
within you, you still long to say what 1 am now saying to the hearing 
of the whole of mankind: I am proud of my own value and of the 
fact that 1 wish to live. 

“This wish — which you share, yet submerge as an evil— is the only 
remnant of the good within you. but it i$ a wish one must learn to 
deserve. His own happiness is man's only moral purpose, but only 
his own virtue can achieve it. Virtue is tot an end in itself. Virtue 
is not its own reward or sacrificial fodder?: for the reward of evil. Life 
is the reward of virtue — and happiness is the goal and the reward 
of life. 

“Just as your body has two fundamental sensations, pleasure arid 
pain, as signs of its welfare or injury, is a barometer of its basic 
alternative, life or death, so your consciousness has two fundamental 
emotions, joy and suffering, in answer to the same alternative. Your 

934 



emotions are estimates of that which furthers your life or threatens 
it, lightning calculators giving you a sum of your profit or loss. You 
have no choice about your capacity to feel that something is good 
for you or evil, but what you will consider good or evil, what will 
give you joy or pain, what you will love or hate, desire or fear, 
depends on your standard of value. Emotions are inherent in your 
nature, but their content is dictated by your mind Your emotional 
capacity is an empty motor, and your values are the fuel with which 
your mind fills it. If you choose a mix of contradictions, it will clog 
your motor, corrode your transmission and wreck you on your first 
attempt to move with a machine which you, the driver, have cor- 
rupted. 

"If you hold the irrational as your standard of value and the im- 
possible as your concept ol the good, it you long for rewards you 
have not earned, for a fortune, or a love you don't deserve, for a 
loophole in the law of causality, for an A that becomes non-A at 
your whim, if you desire the opposite ol existence — you will reach 
it Do not cry, when you reach it, that file is trust rat ion and that 
happiness is impossible to man. check your fuel: it brought you where 
vou wanted lo go. 

'Happiness is not to be achieved at the command of emotional 
" hums Happiness is not the satisfaction of whatever irrational wishes 
\ou might blindly attempt to indulge Happiness is a state of non- 
tontradiclory joy — a joy without penalty 01 guilt, a joy that does not 
clash with any of your values and docs not work for your own de- 
struction, not the joy of escaping bom your mind, but of using your 
mind’s fullest power, not the joy of taking reality, but of achieving 
values that are real, not the joy of a drunkard, but of a producer. 
Huppincss is possible only to a rational man, the man who desires 
nothing but rational goals, seeks nothing but rational values and finds 
his joy in nothing but rational actions. 

“Just as 1 support my life, neither by robbery nor alms, but by my 
own effort, so 1 do not seek to deitve my happiness from the injury 
or the favor of others, but earn it by my own achievement. Just as 
1 do not consider (he pleasure of others as the goal of my life, so I 
do not consider my pleasure as the goal of the lives of others. Just 
as there are no contradictions in my values and no conflicts among 
my desires — so there are no victims and no conflicts of interest 
among rational men, men who do not desire the unearned and do 
not view one another with a cannibal’s lust, men who neither make 
sacrifices nor accept them. 

“The symbol of all relationships among such men, the moral sym- 
bol of respect for human beings, is the trader. We, who live by values, 
not by loot, arc traders, both in matter and in spirit. A trader is a 
man who earns what he gets and does not give or take the unde* 
served. A trader does not ask to be paid for his failures, nor does 
fie ask to be loved for his flaws. A trader does not squander his 
body as fodder or his soul as alms. Just as he does not give his work 
except in trade for material values, so he does not give the values 
of his spirit — his love, his friendship, his esteem — except in payment 
and in trade for human virtues, in payment for his own selfish plea- 

935 



sure, which he receives from men he can respect. The mystic para- 
sites who have, throughout the ages, reviled the traders and held 
them in contempt, while honoring the beggars and the looters, have 
known the secret motive of their sneers: a trader is the entity they 
dread — a man of justice. 

“Do you ask what moral obligation 1 owe to my fellow men? 
None — except the obligation I owe to myself, to material objects and 
to all of existence: rationality. I deal with men as my nature and 
theirs demands: by means of reason. I seek or desire nothing from 
them except such relations as they care to enter of their own volun- 
tary choice. It is only with their mind that 1 can deal and only for my 
own self-interest, when they sec that my interest coincides with 
theirs. When they don't, 1 enter no relationship; 1 let dissenters go 
their way and I do not swerve from mine. I win by means of nothing 
but logic and I surrender to nothing but logic. I do not surrender 
my reason or deal with men who surrender theirs, i have nothing to 
gain from fools or cowards; 1 have no benefits to seek from human 
vices: from stupidity, dishonesty or fear. The only value men can 
offer me is the work of their mind. When 1 disagree with a rational 
man. I let reality be our final arbiter; if I am right, he will learn; ll 
I am wrong, I will; one of us will win, but both will profit. 

“Whatever may be open to disagreement, there is one act of evil 
that may not, the act that no man may commit against others and 
no man may sanction or forgive. So long as men desire to live to- 
gether, no man may initiate — do you hear me? no man may start — 
the use of physical force against others. 

“To inteipose the threat of physical destruction between a man 
and his perception of reality, is to negate and paralyze his means of 
survival; to force him to act against his own judgment, is like forcing 
him to act against his own sight. Whoever, to whatever purpose or 
extent, initiates the use of force, is a killer acting on the premise of 
death in a manner wider than murder: the premise of destroying 
man's capacity to live. 

“Do not open your mouth to tell me that your mind has convinced 
you of your right to force my mind. Force and mind are opposites, 
morality ends where a gun begins. When you declare that men are 
irrational animals and propose to treat them as such, you define 
thereby your own character and can no longer claim the sanction of 
reason — as no advocate of contradictions can claim it. There can be 
no ‘right’ to destroy the source of rights, the only means of judging 
right and wrong: the mind. 

“To force a man to drop his own mind and to accept your will as a 
substitute, with a gun in place of a syllogism, with terror in place ol 
proof, and death as the final argument — is to attempt to exist m defi- 
ance of reality. Reality demands of man that jhe act for his own rational 
interest; your gun demands of him that he act against it. Reality threat- 
ens man with death if he does not act on h|s rational judgment; you 
threaten him with death if he does. You^ place him into a world 
where the price of his life is the surrender 6f all the virtues required 
by life — and death by a process of gradual destruction is all that you 

936 



and your system will achieve, when death is made to be the ruling 
power, the winning argument in a society of men. 

“Be it a highwayman who confronts a traveler with the ultimatum: 
‘Your money or your life,' or a politician who confronts a country 
with the ultimatum: ‘Your children’s education or your life,’ the 
meaning of that ultimatum is: ‘Your mind or your life’— -and neither 
is possible to man without the other. 

“tf there are degrees of evil, it is hard to say who is the more 
contemptible: the brute who assumes the right to force the mind of 
others or the moral degenerate who grants to others the right to 
force his mind. That is the moral absolute one does not leave open 
to debate. I do not grant the terms of reason to men who propose 
to deprive me of reason. 1 do not enter discussions with neighbors 
who think they can forbid me to think. I do not place my moral 
sanction upon a murderer’s wish to kill me. When a man attempts 
to deal with me by force. I answer him— by force. 

“It is only as retaliation that force may be used and only against 
the man who starts its use. No. I do not share his evil or sink to his 
concept of moiality: I merely grant him his choice, destruction, the 
only destruction he had the right to choose: his own. He uses force 
to seize a value; 1 use it only to destroy destruction. A holdup man 
seeks to gain wealth by killing me; I do not grow richer by killing a 
holdup man. 1 seek no values by means of evil, nor do 1 surrender 
my values to evil. 

“In the name of all the producers who had kept you alive and 
received youi death ultimatums in payment, 1 now answer you with 
a single ultimatum of our own: Our work or your guns. You can 
choose either; you can’t have both. We do not initiate the use of 
torce against others or submit to force at their hands. If you desire 
ever again to live in an industrial society, it will be on our moral 
terms. Our terms and our motive power are the antithesis of yours. 
You have been using fear as your weapon and have been bringiag 
death to man as his punishment for rejecting your morality. We offer 
him life as his reward for accepting ours. 

“You who are worshippers of the zero — you have never discovered 
that achieving life is not the equivalent of avoiding death. Joy is not 
the absence of pain,’ intelligence is not the absence of stupidity,’ 
light is not ‘the absence of darkness.' an entity is not ‘the absence 
of a nonentity/ Building is not done by abstaining from demolition; 
centuries of sitting and waiting in such abstinence will not raise one 
single girder for you to abstain from demolishing — and now you can 
no longer say to me, the builder: ‘Produce, and feed us in exchange 
lor our not destroying your production/ 1 am answering in the name 
of all your victims: Perish with and in your own void. Existence is 
not a negation of negatives. Evil, not value, is an absence and a 
negation, evil is impotent and has no power but that which we let it 
extort from us. Perish, because we have learned that a zero cannot 
hold a mortgage over life. 

“You seek escape from pain. We seek the achievement of happi- 
ness. You exist for the sake of avoiding punishment. We exist for 
the sake of earning rewards. Threats will not make us function; fear 

937 



is not our incentive. It is not death that we wish to avoid, but life 
that we wish to live. 

“You, who have lost the concept of the difference, you who claim 
that fear and joy are incentives of equal power — and secretly add 
that fear is the more practical*- you do not wish to live, and only 
fear of death still holds you to the existence you have damned. You 
dart in panic through the trap ol your days, looking for the exit you 
have closed, running from a pursuer you dare not name to a terror 
you dare not acknowledge, and the greater your terror the greater 
your dread of the only act that could save you: thinking. The purpose 
of your struggle is not to know, nut to grasp or name or hear the 
thing I shall now state to your hearing: that yours is the Morality 
of Death. 

“Death is the standard of your values, death is vour chosen goal, 
and you have to keep running, since there is no escape from the 
pursuer who is out to destroy you or from the knowledge that the 
pursuer is yourself. Stop running, for once — there is no place to 
run — stand naked, as you dread to stand, but as I see you, and take 
a look at what you dared to call a moral code. 

“Damnation is the start of your morality, destruction is its purpose, 
means and end. Your code begins by damning man as evil, then 
demands that he practice a good which it defines as impossible for 
him to practice. It demands, as his first proof of virtue, that he accept 
his own depravity without proof. It demands that he start, not with 
a standard of value, but with a standard of evil, which is himself, by 
means of which he is then to define the good: the good is that which 
he is not. 

’ “It does not matter who then becomes the profiteer on his re- 
nounced glory and tormented soul, a mystic God with some incom- 
prehensible design or any passer-by whose rotting sores are held as 
# some inexplicable claim upon him — it does not matter, the good is 
not for him to understand, his duty is to crawl through years of 
penance, atoning for the guilt of his existence to any stray collector 
of unintelligible debts, his only concept of a value is a zero: the good 
is that which is non-man. 

“The name of this monstrous absurdity is Original Sin, 

“A sin without volition is a slap at morality and an insolent contra- 
diction in terms: that which is outside the possibility of choice is 
outside the province of morality. If man is evil by birth, he has no 
will, no power to change it; if he has no will, he can be neither good 
nor evil; a robot is amoral. To hold, as map’s sin, a fact not open 
to his choice is a mockery of morality. To hlold man’s nature as his 
sin is a mockery of nature. To punish him for a crime he committed 
before he was born is a mockery of justice. ?To hold him guilty in a 
matter where no innocence exists is a mockcfy of reason. To destroy 
morality, nature, justice and reason by .nearjs of a single concept is 
a feat of evil hardly to be matched. Yet that k the root of your code. 

“Do not hide behind the cowardly evasion that man is born with 
free will, but with a ‘tendency’ to evil. A free will saddled with a 
tendency is like a game with loaded dice. It Forces man to struggle 
through the effort of playing, to bear responsibility and pay for the 

938 



game, but the decision is weighted in favot of a tendency that he 
had no power to escape. If the tendency is of his choice, he cannot 
possess it at birth; if it is not of his choice, his will is not free. 

“What is the nature of the guilt that your teachers call his Original 
Sin? What are the evils man acquired when he fell from a state they 
consider perfection? Their myth declares that he ate the fruit of the 
tree of knowledge - he acquired a mind and became a rational being. 
It was the knowledge of good and evil— he became a moral being. 
He was sentenced to earn his bread by his labor — he became a pro- 
ductive being. He was sentenced to experience desire — he acquired 
the capacity of sexual enjoyment. The evils for which they damn him 
are reason, morality, creativeness, joy — all the cardinal values of his 
existence. It is not his vices that their myth ol man’s fall is designed 
to explain and condemn, it is not his errors that they hold as his 
guilt, but the essence of his natute as man. Whatever he was — that 
robot in the Garden of Eden, who existed without mind, without 
values, without labor, without love— he was not man. 

“Man’s fall, according to your teachers, was that he gamed the 
virtues required to live. These virtues, by their standard, are his Sin. 
His evil, they charge, is that he’s man His guilt, they charge, is that 
he lives. 

“They call it a morality of mercy and a doctrine of love for man. 

“No, they say. they do not preach that rnan is evil, the evil is only 
that alien object* his body. No, they say, thev do not wish to kill 
him, they only wish to make him lose his body. They seek to help 
him, they say, against his pain — and they point at the torture rack 
to which they've tied him, the rack with two wheels that pull him 
m opposite directions, the rack of the doctrine that splits his soul 
and body. 

“They have cut man in two, setting one half against the other. 
They have taught him that his body and his consciousness are two 
enemies engaged in deadly conflict, two antagonists of opposite na- 
tures, contradictory claims, incompatible needs, that to benefit one 
is to injure the other, that his soul belongs to a supernatural realm, 
but his body is an evil prison holding it in bondage to this earth — 
Lind that the good is lo defeat his body, to undermine it by years of 
patient struggle, digging his way to that gloiious jail-break which 
leads into the freedom of the grave. 

“They have taught man that he is a hopeless misfit made of two 
elements, both symbols of death A body without a soul is a corpse, 
a soul without a body is a ghost — yet such is their image of man’s 
nature: the battleground of a struggle between a coipse and a ghost 
a corpse endowed with some evil volition of its own and a ghost 
endowed with the knowledge that everything known to man is non- 
existent, that only the unknowable exists. 

“Do you observe what human faculty that doctrine was designed 
to ignore? It was man's mind that had to be negated in order to 
make him fall apart. Once he surrendered reason, he was left at the 
mercy of two monsters whom he could not lathom or control: of a 
body moved by unaccountable instincts and of a soul moved by mys- 

939 



tic revelations — he was left as the passively ravaged victim of a battle 
between a robot and a dictaphone. 

“And as he now crawls through the wreckage, groping blindly for 
a way to live, your teachers offer him the help of a morality that 
proclaims that he’ll find no solution and must seek no fulfillment on 
earth. Real existence, they tell him, is that which he cannot perceive, 
true consciousness is the faculty of perceiving the non-existent — and 
if he is unable to understand it, that is the proof that his existence 
is evil and his consciousness impotent. 

“As products of the split between man’s soul and body, there are 
two kinds of teachers of the Morality of Death: the mystics of spirit 
and the mystics of muscle, whom you call the spiritualists and the 
materialists, those who believe in consciousness without existence 
and those who believe in existence without consciousness. Both de- 
mand the surrender of your mind, one to their revelations, the other 
to their reflexes. No matter how loudly they posture in the roles of 
irreconctlahlc antagonists, their moral codes are alike, and so are 
their aims: in matter — the enslavement of man's body, in spirit — the 
destruction of his mind. 

“The good, say the mystics of spirit, is God, a being whose only 
definition is that he is beyond man’s power to conceive — a definition 
that invalidates man’s consciousness and nullifies his concepts of exis- 
tence. The good, say the mystics of muscle, is Society — a thing which 
they define as an organism that possesses no physical form, a supei 
being embodied in no one in particular and everyone in general 
except yourself. Man’s mind, say the mystics of spirit, must be subor- 
dinated to the will of God. Man's mind, say the mystics of muscle, 
must be subordinated to the will of Society. Man’s standard ot value, 
say the mystics of spirit, is the pleasure of God. whose standards arc 
beyond man’s power of comprehension and must be accepted on 
faith. Man's standaid of value, say the mystics of muscle, is the plea- 
sure of Society, whose standards are beyond man’s right of judgment 
and must be obeyed as a primary absolute The purpose ot man's 
life, say both, is to become an abject zombie who serves a purpose 
he does not know, for reasons he is not to question. His reward, say 
the mystics of spirit, will be given to him beyond the giave. His 
rewaid, say the mystics of muscle, will be given on earth — to his 
great-grandchildren. 

"Selfishness — say both — is man’s evil Man's good — say both — is 
to give up his personal desires, to deny himself, renounce lumscli, 
surrender; man's good is to negate the life he lives. Sacrifice — cry 
both — is the essence of morality, the highest virtue within man's 
reach, 

“Whoever is now within reach of my viitcc. whoever is man the 
victim, not man the killer, I am speaking fat the deathbed of yo.ut 
mind, at the brink of that darkness in whifch you're drowning, and 
if there still remains within you the power to struggle to hold on to 
those fading sparks which had been yourseff — use it now. The word 
that has destroyed you is ‘ sacrifice / Use the last of your strength to 
understand its meaning. You're still alive. You have a chance. 

“ ‘Sacrifice’ does not mean the rejection of the worthless, but of 

940 



the precious. ‘Sacrifice’ does not mean the rejection of the evil for 
the sake of the good, but of the good for the sake of the evil ‘Sacri- 
fice’ is the surrender of that which you value in favor of that which 
you don’t. 

“If you exchange a penny for a dollar, it is not a sacrifice; if you 
exchange a dollar for a penny, it is. If you achieve a career you 
wanted, after years of struggle, it is not a sacrifice; if you then re- 
nounce it for the sake of a rival, it is. If you own a bottle of milk 
and give it to your starving child, it is not a sacrifice; if you give it 
to your neighbor's child and let your own die. it is. 

“If you give money to help a friend, it is not a sacrifice; if you 
give it to a worthless stranger, it is. 11 you give your friend a sum 
you can atford, it is not a sacrifice; if you give him money at the 
cost of your own discomfort, it is only a partial virtue, according to 
this sort of moral standard; if you give him money at the cost of 
disaster to yourself — that is the virtue of sacrifice in full. 

“If you renounce all personal desire and dedicate your life to those 
you love, you do not achieve full virtue: you still retain a value of 
your own, which is your love. II you devote your life to random 
strangers, it is an act of greater virtue. If you devote your life to 
serving men you hate— chat is the greatest of the virtues you can 
practice. 

“A sacrifice is the surrender of a value. Full sacrifice is full surren- 
der of all values. If you wish to achieve full virtue, you must seek 
no gratitude in icturn lor your sacrifice, no praise, no love, no admi- 
ration. no self-esteem, not even the pride of being virtuous: the faint- 
est trace of any gam dilutes your virtue. If you pursue a course ol 
action that does not taint your life by any joy, that brings you no 
value in matter, no value in spirit, no gain, no profit, no reward — if 
you achieve this state of total zero, you have achieved the ideal of 
moral perfection. 

“You are told that moral perfection is impossible to man — and, 
by this standard, it is. You cannot achieve it so long as you live, but 
the value of your life and of your person is gauged by how closely 
you succeed in approaching that ideal zero which is death . 

“If you start, however, as a passionless blank, as a vegetable seek- 
ing to be eaten, with no values to reject and no wishes to renounce, 
you will not win the crown of sacrifice. It is not a sacrifice to re- 
nounce the unwanted. It is not a sacrifice to give your life for others, 
if death is your personal desire. To achieve the virtue of sacrifice, 
you must want to live, you must love it, you must burn with passion 
for this earth and for all the splendor it can give you — you must feel 
the twist of every knife as it slashes your desires away from your 
reach and drains your love out of your body. It is not mere death 
that the morality of sacrifice holds out to you as an ideal, but death 
by slow torture. 

“Do not remind me that it pertains only to this life on earth. I 
am concerned with no other. Neither are you. 

“If you wish to save the Iasi of your dignity, do not call your best 
actions a ‘sacrifice 1 : that term brands you as immoral. If a mother 
buys food for her hungry child rather than a hat for herself, it is not 

941 



a sacrifice; she values the child higher than the hat; but it is $ sacrifice 
to the kind of mother whose higher value is the hat, who would 
prefer her child to starve and feeds him only from a sense of duty. 
If a man dies fighting for his own freedom, it is not a sacrifice: he is 
not willing to live as a slave; but it is a sacrifice to the kind of man 
who's willing. If a man refuses to sell his convictions, it is not a 
sacrifice, unless he is the sort of man who has no convictions. 

“Sacrifice could be proper only for those who have nothing to 
sacrifice— no values, no standards, no judgment —those whose desires 
are irrational whims, blindly conceived and lightly surrendered. For 
a man of moral stature, whose desires are born of rational values, 
sacrifice is the surrender of the right to the wrong, of the good to 
the evil. 

“The creed of sacrifice is a morality for the immoral — a morality 
that declares its own bankruptcy by confessing that it can’t imparl 
to men any personal stake in virtues or value, and that their souls 
are sewers of depravity, which they must be taught to sacrifice. By 
its own confession, it is impotent to teach men to be good and can 
only subject them to constant punishment 

“Are you thinking, m some foggy stupor, that it’s only material 
values that your morality requires you to sacrifice? And what do you 
think are material values? Matter has no value except as a means 
for the satisfaction of human desires. Matter is only a tool of human 
values. To what service are you asked to give the material tools your 
virtue has produced? To the service of that which you regard as evil 
to a principle you do not share, to a person you do not respect, to 
the achievement of a purpose opposed to your own— -else your gift 
is not a sacrifice. 

* “Your morality tells you to renounce the material world and to 
divorce your values from matter. A man whose values are given no 
expression in material form, whose existence is unrelated to his ide- 
# als, whose actions contradict his convictions, is a cheap little hypo- 
crite — yet that is the man who obeys your morality and divorces his 
values from matter. The man who loves one woman, but sleeps with 
another — the man who admires the talent of a worker, but hires 
another — the man who considers one cause to be just, but donates 
his money to the support of another— the man who holds high stan- 
dards of craftsmanship, but devotes his etfort to the production of 
trash — these are the men who have renounced matter, the men who 
believe that the values of their spirit cannot be brought into mate- 
rial reality. 

“Do you say it is the spirit that such men; have renounced? Yes, 
of course. You cannot have one without the other. You are an indi- 
visible entity of matter and consciousness. Renounce your conscious- 
ness and you become a brute. Renounce youf body and you become 
a fake. Renounce the material world and yoji surrender it to evil.- 

“And that is precisely the goal of your morality, the duty that your 
code demands of you. Give to that which yi>u do not enjoy, serve 
that which you do not admire, submit to that which you consider 
evil — surrender the world to the values of others, deny, reject, re- 

942 



nounce your self. Your self is your mind: renounce it and you become 
a chunk of meat ready for any cannibal to swallow. 

“It is your mind that they want you to surrender— all those who 
preach the creed of sacrifice, whatever their tags or their motives, 
whether they demand it for the sake of your soul or of your body, 
whether they promise you another life in heaven or a full stomach 
on this earth. Those who start by saying: ‘It is selfish to pursue your 
own wishes, you must sacrifice them to the wishes of others’ — end 
up by saying: ‘It is selfish to uphold your convictions, you must sacri- 
fice them to the convictions of others.’ 

“ Ibis much is true: the most selfish of all things is the independent 
mind that recognizes no authority higher than its own and no value 
higher than its judgment of truth. You are asked to sacrifice your 
intellectual integrity, your logic, your reason, your standard of 
truth— in favor of becoming a prostitute whose standard is the great- 
est good for the greatest number. 

"If you search your code tor guidance, for an answer to the ques- 
tion: ‘What is the good?' — the only answer you will find is * The good 
of others , ’ The good is whatever others wish, whatever you feel they 
teel they wish, or whatever you feel they ought to feel. The good 
of others’ is a magic formula that translorms anything into gold, a 
lormula to be recited as a guarantee of moral glory and as a fumiga- 
tor for any action, even the slaughter ol a continent Your standard 
ot viitue is not an object, not an act, not a principle, but an intention. 
You need no proof, no reasons, no success, you need not achieve in 
fact the good of others —all you need to know is that your motive 
was the good of others, not your own. Your onlv definition of the 
good ls a negation: the good is the ‘non-good foi me.’ 

"Your code — which boasts that it upholds eternal, absolute, objec- 
tive moral values and scorns the conditional, the relative and the 
subjective — your code hands out, as its version of the absolute, the 
following rule of moral conduct: If you wish it, it’s evil; it others 
wish it, it’s good; if the motive of your action is your welfare, don’t 
do it; if the motive is the welfare of others, then anything goes. 

"As this double-jointed, double-standard morality splits you in 
halt, so it splits mankind into two enemy camps: one is you, the 
other is all the rest ot humanity. You are the only outcast who has 
no right to wish to live. You ate the only servant, the rest are the 
masters, you are the only giver, the rest are the lakers, you are the 
eternal debtor, the rest are the creditors nevet to be paid off. You 
must not question their right to your sacrifice, or the nature of their 
wishes and their needs: their right is conferred upon them by a nega- 
tive, by the fact that they are ‘non-you,’ 

"For those of you who might ask questions, your code provides a 
consolation prize and booby-trap: it is for your own happiness, it 
^ays, that you must serve the happiness of others, the only way to 
achieve your joy is to give it up to otheis, the only way to achieve 
your prosperity is to surrender your wealth to others, the only way 
to protect your life is to protect all men except yourself —and if you 
find no joy in this procedure, it is your own fault and the proof of 
your evil; if you were good, you would find your happiness in provid- 

943 



ing a banquet for others, and your dignity in existing on such crumbs 
as they might care to toss you. 

“You who have no standard of self-esteem, accept the guilt and 
dare not ask the questions. But you know the unadmitted answer, 
refusing to acknowledge what you see, what hidden premise moves 
your world. You know it, not in honest statement, but as a dark 
uneasiness within you, while you flounder between guiltily cheating 
and grudgingly practicing a principle too vicious to name. 

“I, who do not accept the unearned, neither in values nor in guilt, 
am here to ask the questions you evaded. Why is it moral to serve 
the happiness of others, but not your own? If enjoyment is a value, 
why is it moral when experienced by others, but immoral when expe- 
rienced by you? If the sensation of eating a cake is a value, why is 
it an immoral indulgence in your stomach, but a moral goal for you 
to achieve in the stomach ot others? Why is it immoral for you to 
desire, but moral for others to do so? Why is it immoral to produce 
a value and keep it. but moral to give it away? And if it is not moral 
for you to keep a value, why is it moral for others to accept it? it 
you are selfless and virtuous when you give U, are they not selfish 
and vicious when they take it? Does virtue consist of serving vice? 
Is the moral purpose of those who are good, sell-immolation for the 
sake of those who are evil? 

*‘The answer you evade, the monstrous answer is: No, the takers 
are not evil, provided they did not earn the value you gave them, ft 
is not immoral for them to accept it, provided they are unable to 
produce it, unable to deserve it, unable to give you any value in 
return. It is not immoral for them to enjoy it, provided they do not 
obtain it by right. 

“Such is the secret core of your creed, the other half of your 
double standard: it is immoral to live by your own effort, but moral 
to live by the effort ol others — it is immoral to consume your own 
product, but moral to consume the products of others — it is immoral 
to earn, but moral to mooch— it is the parasites who are the moral 
justification for the existence of the producers, but the existence of 
the parasites is an end in itself— it is evil to profit by achievement, 
but good to profit by sacrifice — it is evil to create your own happi- 
ness, but good to enjoy it at the price of the blood of others. 

“Your code divides mankind into two castes and commands them 
to live by opposite rules: those who may desire anything and those 
who may desire nothing, the chosen and the damned, the riders and 
the carriers, the eaters and the eaten. What standard determines 
your caste? What passkey admits you to the moral elite? The passkey 
is lack of value. ■ 

“Whatever the value involved, it is youir lack of it that gives you 
a claim upon those who don’t lack it. It if your need that gives you 
a claim to rewards. If you are able to satisfy your need, your ability 
annuls your right to satisfy it. But a nee^ you are unable to satisfy 
gives you first right to the lives of mankind. 

“If you succeed, any man who fails is y6ur master; if you fail, any 
man who succeeds is your serf. Whether your failure is just or not, 
whether your wishes are rational or not. Whether your misfortune is 

944 



undeserved or the result of your vices, it is misfortune that gives you 
a right to rewards. It is pain, regardless of its nature or cause, pain 
as a primary absolute, that gives you a mortgage on ail of existence. 

“If you heal your pain by your own effort, you receive no moral 
credit: your code regards it scornfully as an act of self-interest. What- 
ever value you seek to acquire, be it wealth or food or love or rights, 
if you acquire it by means of your virtue, your code does not regard 
it as a moral acquisition: you occasion no loss to anyone, it is a 
trade, not alms; a payment, not a sacrifice. The deserved belongs in 
the selfish, commercial realm of mutual profit; it is only the unde- 
served that calls for that moral transaction which consists of profit 
to one at the price of disaster to the other. To demand rewards for 
your virtue is selfish and immoral; it is your lack of virtue that trans- 
forms your demand into a moral right 

“A morality that holds need as a claim, holds emptiness — nonexist- 
ence — as its standard of value; it rewards an absence , a defect: weak- 
ness, inability, incompetence, suffering, disease, disaster, the lack, the 
lault, the flaw —the zero. 

“Who provides the account to pay these claims? Those who are 
cursed for being non-zeros, each to the extent of his distance from 
that ideal. Since all values ate the product of virtues, the degree of 
your virtue is used as the measure of your penalty: the degree of 
your faults is used as the measure of your gain Your code declares 
that the rational man must sacrifice himself to the irrational, the 
independent man to parasites, the honest man to the dishonest, the 
man ol justice to the unjust, the productive man to thieving loafers, 
the man of integrity to compromising knaves, the man of self-esteem 
to sniveling neurotics. Do you wonder at the meanness of soul in 
those you see around you ’ The man who achieves these virtues will 
not accept your moral code; the man who accepts your moral code 
will not achieve these virtues 

“Under a morality of sacrifice, the first value you sacrifice is moral- 
ity: the next is self-esteem When need is the standard, every man 
is both victim and parasite. As a victim, he musi labor to fill the 
needs of others, leaving himself in the position of a parasite whose 
needs must be filled by others. He cannot approach his fellow men 
except in one of two disgraceful roles: he is both a beggar and a 
sucker. 

“You tear the man who has a dollar less than you. that dollar is 
rightfully his, he makes you feel like a moral defrauder. You hate 
the man who has a dollar more than you, that dollar is rightfully 
yours, he makes you feel that you aie morally defrauded. The man 
below is a source of your guilt, the man above is a source of your 
frustration. You do not know what to surrender or demand, when 
U> give and when to grab, what pleasure in life is rightfully yours 
and what debt is still unpaid to others — you struggle to evade, as 
‘theory,’ the knowledge that by the moral standard you’ve accepted 
you are guilty every moment of your fife, there is no mouthful of 
food you swallow that is not needed by someone somewhere on 
earth — and you give up the problem in blind resentment, you con- 
clude that moral perfection is not to be achieved or desired f, that you 

945 



will muddle through by snatching as snatch can and by avoiding the 
eyes of the young, of those who look at you as if self-esteem were 
possible and they expected you to have it. Guilt is all that you retain 
within your soul — and so does every other man, as he goes past, 
avoiding your eyes. Do you wonder why your morality has not 
achieved brotherhood on earth or the good will of man to man? 

“The justification of sacrifice, that your morality, propounds, is 
more corrupt than the corruption it purports to justify. The motive 
of your sacrifice, it tells you, should be love — the love you ought to 
feel for every man, A morality that professes the belief that the 
values of the spirit are more precious than matter, a morality that 
teaches you to scorn a whore who gives her body indiscriminately 
to all men — this same morality demands thai you surrender your 
soul to promiscuous love for all comers. 

“As there can be no causeless wealth, so there can be no causeless 
love or any sort of causeless emotion. An emotion is a response to 
a fact of reality, an estimate dictated by your standards. To love is 
to value. The man who tells you that it is possible to value without 
values, to love those whom you appraise as worthless, is the man 
who tells you that it is possible to grow rich by consuming without 
producing and that paper money is as valuable as gold. 

“Observe that ho docs not expect you to fee) a causeless fear. 
When his kind get into power, they are expert at contriving means 
of terror, at giving you ample cause to feel the fear by which they 
desire to rule you. But when it comes to love, the highest of emo- 
tions, you permit them to shriek at you accusingly that you are a 
moral delinquent if you’re incapable of feeling causeless love When 
a man feels fear without reason, you call him to the attention of a 
psychiatrist; you are not so careful to protect the meaning, the nature 
and the dignity of love. 

“Love is the expression of one’s values, the greatest reward you can 
earn for the moral qualities you have achieved in your character and per- 
son, the emotional piice paid by one man for the joy he receives from 
the virtues of another Your morality demands that you divorce your 
love from values and hand it down to any vagrant; not as response 
to his worth, but as response to his need, not as reward, but as alms, 
not as a payment for virtues, but as a blank check on vices. Your 
morality tells you that the purpose of love is to set you free of the 
bonds of morality, that love is superior to moral judgment; that true 
love transcends, forgives and survives every manner of evil in its 
object, and the greater the love the greater the depravity it permits 
to the loved. To love a man for his virtues is paltry and human, it 
tells you; to love him for his flaws is divine. To love those who are 
worthy of it is self-interest; to love the unworthy is sacrifice. You owe 
your love to those who don’t deserve it, arid the less they deserve it, 
the more love you owe them— the more loathsome the object, the 
nobler your love — the more unfastidious |?our love, the greater the 
virtue — and if you can bring your soul to ? the state of a dump heap 
that welcomes anything on equal terms. If you can cease to value’ 
moral values, you have achieved the state of moral perfection. 

“Such is your morality of sacrifice and such are the twin ideals it 

946 



offers: to refashion the life of your body in the image of a human 
stockyard, and the life of your spirit in the image of a dump. 

“Such was your goal— and you’ve reached it. Why do you now 
moan complaints about man’s impotence and the futility of human 
aspirations? Because you were unable to prosper by seeking destruc- 
tion? Because you were unable to find joy by worshipping pain? 
Because you were unable to live by holding death as your standard 
of value? 

“The degree of your ability to live was the degree to which you 
broke your moral code, yet you believe that those who preach it are 
friends of humanity, you damn yourself and dare not question their 
motives or their goals, lake a look at them now, when you face your 
last choice— and if you choose to perish, do so with full knowledge of 
how cheaply so small an enemy has claimed your life. 

“The mystics of both schools, who preach the creed of sacrifice, 
are germs that attack you through a single sore: your fear of relying 
on your mind, lliey tell you that they possess a means of knowledge 
higher than the mind, a mode of consciousness superior to reason — 
like a special pull with some bureaucrat of the universe who gives 
them secret tips withheld from others. The mystics of spirit declare 
that they possess an extra sense you lack: this special sixth sense 
consists of contradicting the whole of the knowledge of your five. 
The mystics of muscle do not bother to assert any claim to extrasen- 
sory' perception: they merely declare that your senses are not valid, 
and that their wisdom consists of perceiving your blindness by some 
manner of unspecified means. Both kinds demand that you invalidate 
vour own consciousness and surrender yourself into their power. 
They offer you, as proof of their superior knowledge, the fact that 
they assert the opposite of everything you know, and as proof of their 
superior ability to deal with existence, the tact that they lead you to 
misery, self-sacrifice, starvation, destruction. 

“They claim that they perceive a mode of being superior to your 
existence on this earth. The mystics of spirit call it ‘another dimen- 
sion,’ which consist of denying dimensions The mystics of muscle 
call it ‘the future,’ which consists ot denying the present. To exist is 
to possess identity. What identity arc they able to give to their supe- 
rior realm? They keep telling you what it is not. but never tell you 
what it is. All their identifications consist of negating: God is that 
which no human mind can know, they sav— and proceed to demand 
that you consider it knowledge — God is non-man, heaven is non- 
earth, soul is non-body, virtue is non-profit, A is non- A, perception 
is non-sensory. knowledge is non- reason. Their definitions are not 
acts of defining, but of wiping out. 

“It is only the metaphysics of a leech that would cling to the idea 
of a universe where a zero is a standard of identification. A leech 
would want to seek escape from the necessity to name its own na- 
ture — escape from the necessity to know that the substance on which 
it builds its private universe is blood. 

“What is the nature of that superior world to which they sacrifice 
the world that exists? The mystics of spirit curse matter, the mystics 
of muscle curse profit. The first wish men to profit by renouncing 

947 



the earth, the second wish men to inherit the earth by "renouncing 
all profit. Their non-material, non-profit worlds are realms where 
rivers run with milk and coffee, where wine spurts from rocks at 
their command, where pastry drops on them from clouds at the price 
of opening their mouth. On this material, profit-chasing earth, an 
enormous investment of virtue— of intelligence, integrity, energy, 
skill — is required to construct a railroad to carry them the distance 
of one mile; in their non-material, non-profit world, they travel from 
planet to planet at the cost of a wish. If an honest person asks them; 
‘How?’ — they answer with righteous scorn that a ‘how’ is the concept 
of vulgar realists; the concept of superior spirits is ‘Somehow.’ C3n 
this earth restricted by matter and profit, rewards are achieved by 
thought; in a world set free of such restrictions, rewards are achieved 
by wishing. 

“And that is the whole of their shabby secret. The secret of all 
their esoteric philosophies, of all their dialectics and super- senses, of 
their evasive eyes and snarling words, the secret for which they de- 
stroy civilization, language, industries and lives, the secret for which 
they pierce their own eyes and eardrums, grind out their senses, 
blank out their minds, the purpose for which they dissolve the abso- 
lutes of reason, logic, mattei, existence, realitv — is to erect upon that 
plastic fog a single holy absolute: their Wish. 

“The restriction they seek to escape is the law of identity. The 
freedom they seek is freedom from the fact that an A will remain 
an A, no matter what their tears or tantrums — that a river will not 
bring them milk, no matter what their hunger— that water will not 
run uphill, no matter what comforts they could gain if it did, and it 
they want to lift it to the roof of a skyscraper, they must do it by a 
process of thought and labor, in which the nature of an inch of pipe 
line counts, but their feelings do not —that their feelings are impotent 
to alter the course of a single speck of dust in space or the nature 
of any action they have committed. 

“Those who tell you that rnan is unable to perceive a reality undis- 
torted by his senses, mean that they arc unwilling to perceive a 
reality undistorted by their feelings. ‘Hungs as they are’ are things 
as perceived by your mind; divorce them from reason and they be- 
come ‘things as perceived by your wishes.’ 

“There is no honest revolt against reason- -and when you accept 
any part of their creed, your motive is to get away with something 
your reason would not permit you to attempt , The freedom you seek 
is freedom from the facl that if you stole your wealth, you arc a 
scoundrel, no matter how much you give to. charity or how many pray- 
ers you recite — that if you sleep with sluts, ypu’rc not a worthy husband, 
no matter how anxiously you feel that youtlove your wife next morn- 
ing— that you arc an entity, not a series random pieces scattered 
through a universe where nothing sticks jand nothing commits you 
to anything, the universe of a child’s nightmare where identities 
switch and swim, where the rotter and th$ hero are interchangeable 
parts arbitrarily assumed at will — that you are a man — that you arc 
an entity — that you are. 


948 



“No matter bow eagerly you claim that the goal of your mystic 
wishing is a higher mode of life, the rebellion against identity is the 
wish for non-existence. The desire not to be anything is the desire 
not to be. 

“Your teachers, the mystics of both schools, have reversed causal- 
ity in their consciousness, then strive to reverse it in existence. They 
take their emotions as a cause, and their mind as a passive effect. 
They make their emotions their tool for perceiving reality. They hold 
their desires as an irreducible primary, as a fact superseding all facts. 
An honest man does not desire until he has identified the object of 
his desire. He says: Tt is, therefore I want it.’ They say: i want it, 
therefore it is.’ 

“They want to cheat the axiom of existence and consciousness, 
they want their consciousness to be an instrument not of perceiving 
but of creating existence, and existence to be not the object but the 
subject of their consciousness — they want to be that God they created 
in their image and likeness, who creates a universe out of a void by 
means of an arbitrary whim. But reality is not to be cheated. What 
they achieve is the opposite of their desire. They want to be omnipo- 
tent power over existence; instead, they lose the power of their con- 
sciousness. By refusing to know, they condemn themselves to the 
horror of a perpetual unknown. 

“Those irrational wishes that draw you to their creed, those emo- 
tions you worship as an idol, on whose altar you sacrifice the earth, 
that dark, incoherent passion within you, which you take as the voice 
of God or of your glands, is nothing more than the corpse ot your 
mind. An emotion that clashes with your reason, an emotion that 
you cannot explain or control, is only the carcass of that stale think- 
ing which you forbade your mind to revise. 

“Whenever you committed the evil of refusing to think and to see, 
of exempting from the absolute ot reality some one small wish of 
yours, whenever you chose to say: Let me withdraw from the judg- 
ment of reason the cookies 1 stole, or the existence of God, let me 
have my one irrational whim and 1 will be a man of reason about 
all else — that was the act of subverting your consciousness, the act 
of corrupting your mind. Your mind then became a fixed jury who 
takes orders from a secret underworld, whose verdict distorts the 
evidence to fit an absolute it dares not touch— and a censored reality 
is the result, a splintered reality where the bits you chose to see are 
floating among the chasms of those you didn't, held together by 
that embalming fluid of the mind which is an emotion exempted 
from thought. 

“The links you strive to drown are casual connections. The enemy 
you seek to defeat is the law of causality: it permits you no miracles. 
The law of causality is the law of identity applied to action. Alt 
actions are caused by entities. The nature of an action is caused and 
determined by the nature of the entities that act; a thing cannot act 
in contradiction to its nature. An action not caused by an entity 
would be caused by a zero, which would mean a zero controlling a 
thing, a non-entity controlling an entity, the non-existent ruling the 
existent — which is the universe of your teachers' desire, the cause of 

949 



their doctrines of causeless action, the reason of their revolt against 
reason, the goal of their morality, their politics, their economics, the 
ideal they strive for: the reign of the zero. 

“The law of identity does not permit you to have your cake and 
eat it, too. The law of causality does not permit you to eat your cake 
before you have it. But il you drown both laws in the blanks of your 
mind, if you pretend to yourself and to others that you don’t see — 
then you can try to proclaim your right to eat your cake today and 
mine tomorrow, you can preach that the way to have a cake is to 
eat it first before you bake it, that the way to produce ts to start by 
consuming, that all wishers have an equal claim to all things, since 
nothing is caused by anything. The corollary of the causeless in mat- 
ter is the unearned in spirit. 

“Whenever you rebel against causality, your motive is the fraudu- 
lent desire, not to escape it, but worse: to reverse it. You want 
unearned love, as if love, the effect, could give you personal value, 
the cause — you want unearned admiration, as if admiration, the ef- 
fect, could give ypu virtue, the cause — you want unearned wealth, 
as if wealth, the effect, could give you ability, the cause — you plead 
for mercy, mercy , not justice, as if an unearned forgiveness could 
wipe out the cause of your plea. And to indulge your ugly little 
shams, you support the doctrines of your teachers, while they run 
hog-wtld proclaiming that spending, the effect, creates riches, the 
cause, that machinery, the effect, creates intelligence, the cause, that 
your sexual desires, the effect, create your philosophical values, the 
cause. 

“Who pays for the orgy? Who causes the causeless 7 Who are the 
victims, condemned to remain unacknowledged and to perish in si- 
lence, lest their agony disturb your pretense that they do not exist? 
We are, we. the men of the mind. 

“We are the cause of all the values that you covet, we who perform 
the process of thinking , winch is the process of defining identity and 
discovering causal connections. We taught you to know, to speak, to 
produce, to desire, to love. You who abandon reason — were it not 
for us who preserve if, you would not be able to fulfill or even to 
conceive your wishes. You would not be able to desire the clothes 
that had not been made, the automobile that had not been invented, 
the money that had not been devised, as exchange for goods that 
did not exist, the admiration that had not been experienced for men 
who had achieved nothing, the love that belongs and pertains only 
to those who preserve their capacity to think, to choose, to value . 

“You — who leap like a savage out of the jungle of your feelings 
to the Fifth Avenue of our New York aqd proclaim that you want 
to keep the electric lights, but to destroy the generators — it is our 
wealth that you use while destroying us, it* is our values that you use 
while damning us, it is our language thjfct you use while denying 
the mind. t 

‘Must as your mystics of spirit invented; their heaven in the image 
of our earth, omitting our existence, and promised you rewards cre- 
ated by miracle out of non-matter — so yojir modern mystics of mus- 
cle omit our existence and promise you a heaven where matter 

950 



shapes itself of its own causeless will into all the rewards desired by 
your non-mind. 

“For centuries, the mystics of spirit had existed by running a pro- 
tection racket— by making life on earth unbearable, then charging 
you for consolation and relief, by forbidding all the virtues that make 
existence possible, then riding on the shoulders of your guilt, by 
declaring production and joy to be sins, then collecting blackmail 
from the sinners. We, the men of the mind, were the unnamed vic- 
tims of their creed, we who were willing to break their moral code 
and to bear damnation for the sin of reason— we who thought and 
acted, while they wished and prayed— we who were moral outcasts, 
we who were bootleggers of life when life was held to be a crime — 
while they basked in moral glory lor the virtue ot surpassing material 
greed and of distributing in selfless chanty the material goods pro- 
duced by-blank-out. 

“Now we are chained and commanded to produce by savages who 
do not grant us even the identification of sinners — by savages who 
proclaim that we do not exist, then threaten to deprive us of the life 
we don’t possess, if we tail to provide them with the goods we don’t 
produce. Now we arc expected to continue running railroads and to 
know the minute when a train will arrive after crossing the span of 
a continent, we are expected to continue running steel mills and to 
know the molecular structure of every drop ol metal in the cables 
of your bridges and in the body of the airplanes that support you in 
mid-air — while the tribes of your grotesque little mystics of muscle 
light over the carcass of our world, gibbering in sounds of non- 
language that there arc no principles, no absolutes, no knowledge, 
no mind. 

“Dropping below the level ol a savage, who believes that the 
magic words he utters have the power to alter reality, they believe 
that reality can be altered by the power of the words they do not 
utter— and their magic tool is the blank-out. the pretense that noth- 
ing can come into existence past the voodoo of their refusal to iden- 
tify it. 

“As they feed on stolen wealth in body, so they feed on stolen 
concepts in mind, and proclaim that honesty consists of refusing to 
know that one is stealing. As they use effects while denying causes, 
so they use our concepts while denying the roots and the existence 
of the concepts they are using. As they seek, not to build, but to 
take over industrial plants, so they seek, not to think, but to take 
over human thinking. 

“As they proclaim that the only requirement for running a factory 
is the ability to turn the cranks of the machines, and blank out the 
question of who created the factory — so they proclaim that there are 
no entities, that nothing exists but motion, and blank out the fact 
that motion presupposes the thing which moves, that without the 
concept of entity, there can be no such concept as ’motion.’ As they 
proclaim their right to consume the unearned, and blank out the 
question of who’s to produce it — so they proclaim that there is no 
law of identity, that nothing exists but change, and blank out the 
fact that change presupposes the concept of what changes, from what 

951 



and to what, that, without the law of identity, no such" concept as 
‘change’ is possible. As they rob an industrialist while denying his 
value, so they seek to seize power over all of existence while denying 
that existence exists. 

“ ‘We know that we know nothing,’ they chatter, blanking out the 
fact that they are claiming knowledge — ‘There are no absolutes, 5 they 
chatter, blanking out the fact that they are uttering an absolute — 
‘You cannot prove that you exist or that you’re conscious,’ they 
chatter, blanking out the fact that proof presupposes existence, con- 
sciousness and a complex chain of knowledge- the existence of some- 
thing to know, of a consciousness able to know it, and of a 
knowledge that has teamed to distinguish between such concepts as 
the proved and the unproved. 

“When a savage who has not learned to speak declares that exis- 
tence must be proved, he is asking you to prove it by means of non- 
existence — when he declares that your consciousness must be proved, 
he is asking you to prove it by means of unconsciousness— he is 
asking you to step into a void outside of existence and consciousness 
to give him proof of both — he is asking you to become a zero gaining 
knowledge about a zero. 

“When he declares that an axiom is a matter of aibitrary choice 
and he doesn’t choose to accept the axiom that he exists, he blanks 
out the fact that he has accepted it by uttering that sentence, that 
the only way to reject it is to shut one’s mouth, expound no theories 
and die. 

“An axiom is a statement that identifies the base of knowledge and 
of any further statement pertaining to that knowledge, a statement 
necessarily contained m all others, whether any particular speaker 
chooses to identify it or not. An axiom is a proposition that defeats 
its opponents by the fact that they have to accept it and use it in 
the process of any attempt to deny it. Let the caveman who does 
not choose to accept the axiom of identity, try to present his theory 
without using the concept of identity or any concept derived from 
it — let the anthropoid who does not choose to accept the existence 
of nouns, try to devise a language without nouns, adjectives or 
verbSr — let the witch-doctor who does not choose to accept the valid- 
ity of sensory perception, try to prove it without using the data he 
obtained by sensory perception — let the head-hunter who does not 
choose to accept the validity of logic, try to prove it without using 
logic — let the pigmy w r ho proclaims that a skyscraper needs no foun- 
dation after it reaches its fiftieth story, yank the base from under his 
building, not yours — let the cannibal who snarls that the freedom of 
man’s mind was needed to create an industrial civilization, but is not 
needed to maintain it, be given an arrowhead and bearskin, not a 
university chair of economics. 

“Do you think they are taking you baqk to dark ages? They are 
taking you back to darker ages than an>J your history has known.. 
Their goal is not the era of pre-science, b$t the era of pre-language. 
Their purpose is to deprive you of the concept on which man’s mind, 
his life and his culture depend: the concept of an objective reality. 

952 



Identify the development of a human consciousness — and you will 
know the purpose of their creed. 

“A savage is a being who has not grasped that A is A and that 
reality is real. He has arrested his mind at the level of a baby’s, at 
the state when a consciousness acquires its initial sensory perception 
and has not learned to distinguish solid objects. It is to a baby that 
the world appears as a blur of motion, without things that move — 
and the birth of his mind is the day when he grasps that the streak 
that keeps flickering past him is his mother and the whirl beyond 
her is a curtain, that the two are solid entities and neither can turn 
into the other, that they are what they are, that they exist. The day 
when he grasps that matter has no volition is the day when he grasps 
that he has — and this is his birth as a human being. The day when 
he grasps that the reflection he sees m a mirror is not a delusion, 
that it is real, but it is not himself, that the mirage he sees in a desert 
is not a delusion, that the air and the light rays that cause it are 
real, but it is not a city, it is a city's reflection— the day when he 
grasps that he is not a passive recipient of the sensations of any 
given moment, that his senses do not piovidc him with automatic 
knowledge in separate snatches independent of context, but only 
with the material of knowledge, which his mind must learn to inte- 
grate— the day when he grasps that his senses cannot deceive him, 
that physical objects cannot act without causes, that his organs of 
perception are physical and have no volition, no power to invent or 
to distort, that the evidence they give him is an absolute, but his 
mind must learn to understand il T his mind must discover the nature, 
the causes, the full context of his sensory material, his mind must 
identify the things that he perceives — that is the day of his birth as 
a thinker and scientist 

'"We arc the men who reach that day. you arc the men who choose 
to reach it partly; a savage is a man who never does. 

“To a savage, the world is a place of unintelligible miracles where 
anything is possible to inanimate matter and nothing is possible to 
him. His world is not the unknown, but that irrational horror: the 
unknowable. He believes that physical objects are endowed with a 
mysterious volition, moved by causeless , unpredictable whims, while 
he is a helpless pawn at the mercy of forces beyond his control. He 
believes that nature is ruled by demons who possess an omnipotent 
power and that reality is their fluid plaything, where they can turn 
his bowl of meal into a snake and his wife into a beetle at any 
moment, where the A he has never discovered can be any non-A 
they choose, where the only knowledge he possesses is that he must 
not attempt to know. He can count on nothing, he can only wish, 
and he spends his life on wishing, on begging his demons to grant 
him his wishes by the arbitrary powei of their will, giving them credit 
when they do, taking the blame when they don’t, offering them sacri- 
fices in token of his gratitude and sacrifices in token of his guilt, 
crawling on his belly in fear and worship of sun and moon and wind 
and rain and of any thug who announces himself as their spokesman, 
provided his words are unintelligible and his mask sufficiently fright- 
ening — he wishes, begs and crawls, and dies, leaving you, as a record 

953 



of his view of existence, the distorted monstrosities of his idols, part- 
man, part-animal, part-spider, the embodiments of the world of 
non-A. 

“His is the intellectual state of your modem teachers and his is 
the world to which they want to bring you. 

“If you wonder by what means they propose to do it, walk into 
any college classroom and you will hear your professors teaching 
your children that man can be certain of nothing, that his conscious- 
ness has no validity whatever, that he can learn no facts and no laws 
of existence, that he’s incapable of knowing an objective reality. 
What, then, is his standard of knowledge and truth? Whatever others 
believe , is their answer. There is no knowledge, they teach, there’s 
only faith: your belief that you exist is an act of faith, no more valid 
than another’s faith in his right to kill you; the axioms of science are 
an act of faith, no more valid than a mystic’s faith in revelations; 
the belief that electric light can be produced by a generator is an 
act of faith, no more valid than the belief that it can be produced 
by a rabbit’s foot kissed under a stepladder on the first of the 
moon — truth is whatever people want it to be, and people are every- 
one except yourself; reality is whatever people choose to say it is, 
there are no objective facts, there are only people’s arbitrary 
wishes — a man who seeks knowledge in a laboratory by means of 
test tubes and logic is an old-fashioned, superstitious fool; a true 
scientist is a man who goes around taking public polls — and if it 
weren’t for the selfish greed of the manufacturers of steel girders, 
who have a vested interest in obstructing the progress of science, 
you would learn that New York City does not exist, because a poll 
of the entire population of the world would tell you by a landslide 
majority that their beliefs forbid its existence. 

‘'For centuries, the mystics of spirit have proclaimed that faith is 
superior to reason, but have not dared deny the existence of reason. 
Their heirs and product, the mystics of muscle, have completed their 
job and achieved their dream: they proclaim that everything is faith, 
and call it a revolt against believing. As revolt against unproved 
assertions, they proclaim that nothing can be proved; as revolt 
against supernatural knowledge, they proclaim that no knowledge is 
possible; as revolt against the enemies of science, they proclaim that 
science is superstition; as revolt against the enslavement of the mind, 
they proclaim that there is no mind. 

“If you surrender your power to perceive, if you accept the switch 
of your standard from the objective to the collective and wait for 
mankind to tell you what to think, you will find another switch taking 
place before the eyes you have renounced: you will find that your 
teachers become the rulers of the collective, and if you then refuse 
to obey them, protesting that they arefnot the whole of mankind, 
they will answer: ‘By what means do you know that we are- not?’ 
Are, brother? Where did you get that ^Id-fashioned term? 

“if you doubt that such is their purpose, observe with what pas- 
sionate consistency the ntystics of musde are striving to make you 
forget that a concept such as 'mind’ has ever existed. Observe the 
twists of undefined verbiage, the words with rubber meanings, the 

954 



terms left floating in midstream, by means of which they try to get 
around the recognition of the concept of * thinking . ’ Your conscious- 
ness, they tell you, consists of ‘reflexes/ ‘reactions,’ ‘experiences/ 
‘urges/ and ‘drives’— and refuse to identify the means by which they 
acquired that knowledge, to identify the act they are performing 
when they tell it or the act you are performing when you listen. 
Words have the power to ‘condition’ you, they say and refuse to 
identify the reason why words have the power to change your — 
blank-out. A student reading a book understands it through a process 
of — blank-out. A scientist working on an invention is engaged in the 
activity of— blank-out. A psychologist helping a neurotic to solve a 
problem and untangle a conflict, does it by means ot— blank-out. 
An industrialist — blank out— there is no such person. A factory is a 
‘natural resource/ like a tree, a rock or a mud puddle. 

“The problem of production, they tell you, has been solved and 
deserves no study or concern; the only problem left for your ‘re- 
ilexes’ to solve is now the problem of distribution. Who solved the 
problem of production? Humanity, they answer. What was the solu- 
tion? The goods are here. How did they get here? Somehow. What 
caused it? Nothing has causes. 

“They proclaim that every man born is entitled to exist without 
labor and, the laws ot reality to the contrary notwithstanding, is 
entitled to receive his ‘minimum sustenance’— his food, his clothes, 
lus shelter — with no effort on his part, as his due and his birthright. 
To receive it — from whom? Blank-out. Every man. they announce, 
owns an equal share of the technological benefits created in the 
world. Created— by whom? Blank-out. Frantic cowards who posture 
as detenders of industrialists now define the purpose of economics 
as ‘an adjustment between the unlimited desires of men and the 
goods supplied in limited quantity.’ Supplied — by whom? Blank-out. 
Intellectual hoodlums who pose as professors, shrug away the think- 
ers of the past by declaring that their social theories were based on 
the impractical assumption that man was a rational being — but since 
men are not rational, they declare, there ought to be established a 
system that will make it possible for them to exist while being irratio- 
nal , which means: while defying reality. Who will make U possible? 
Blank-out. Any stray mediocrity rushes into print with plans to con- 
trol the production of mankind— and whoever agrees or disagrees 
with his statistics, no one questions his right to enforce his plans by 
means of a gun. Enforce — on whom? Blank-out. Random females 
with causeless incomes flitter on trips around the globe and return 
to delivei the message that the backward peoples of the world de- 
mand a higher standard of living. Demand —of whom? Blank-out. 

“And to forestall any inquiry into the cause of the difference be- 
tween a jungle village and New York City, they resort to the ultimate 
obscenity of explaining man’s industrial progress — skyscrapers, cable 
bridges, power motors, railroad trains — by declaring that man is an 
animal who possesses an instinct of tool-making ♦ ’ 

“Did you wonder what is wrong with the world? You are now 
seeing the climax of the creed of the uncaused and unearned. All 
your gangs of mystics, of spirit or muscle, are fighting one another 

Q55 



for power to rule you, snarling that love is the solution for all the 
problems of your spirit and that a whip is the solution for all the 
problems of your body — you who have agreed to have no mind. 
Granting man less dignity than they grant to cattle, ignoring what 
an animal trainer could tell them — that no animal can be trained by 
fear, that a tortured elephant will trample its torturer, but will not 
work for him or carry his burdens — they expect man to continue to 
produce electronic lubes, supersonic airplanes, atom-smashing en- 
gines and interstellar telescopes, with his ration of meat for reward 
and a lash on his back for incentive. 

“Make no mistake about the character of mystics. To undercut 
your consciousness has always been their only purpose throughout 
the ages — and power , the power to rule you by force, has always 
been their only lust. 

“From the rites of the jungle witch-doctors, which distorted reality 
into grotesque absurdities, stunted the minds of their victims and 
kept them in terror of the supernatural for stagnant stretches of 
centuries— to the supernatural doctrines of the Middle Ages, which 
kept men huddling on the mud floors ot their hovels, in terror that 
the devil might steal the soup they had worked eighteen hours to 
earn — to the seedy little smiling professor who assures you that your 
brain has no capacity to think, that you have no means of perception 
and must blindly obey the omnipotent will of that supernatural force: 
Society — all of it is the same performance for the same and only 
purpose: to reduce you to the kind of pulp that has surrendered the 
validity of its consciousness. 

“But it cannot be done to you without your consent If you permit 
it to be done, you deserve it. 

“When you listen to a mystic’s harangue on the impotence of the 
human mind and begin to doubt your consciousness, not his, when 
you permit your precariously semi-rational state to be shaken by any 
assertion and decide it is safer to trust his superior certainty and 
knowledge, the joke is on both of you: your sanction is the only 
source of certainty he has. The supernatural power that a mystic 
dreads, the unknowable spirit he worships, the consciousness he con- 
siders omnipotent is — yours. 

“A mystic is a man who surrendered his mind at its first encounter 
with the minds of others. Somewhere in the distant reaches of his 
childhood, when his own understanding of reality clashed with the 
assertions of others, with their arbitrary orders and contradictory 
demands, he gave in to so craven a fear of independence that he 
renounced his rational faculty. At the cfossroads of the choice be- 
tween ‘I know’ and They say, 1 he chose* the authority of others, he 
chose to submit rather than to understand, to believe rather than to 
think. Faith in the supernatural begins ai faith in the superiority of 
others. His surrender took the form of the feeling that he must hide 
his lack of understanding, that other4 possess some mysterious 
knowledge of which he alone is deprived, that reality is whatever 
they want it to be, through some means^ forever denied to him, * 

“From then on, afraid to think, he vs left at the mercy of unidenti- 
fied feelings. His feelings become his only guide, his only remnant 

956 



of personal identity, he clings to them with ferocious possessive- 
ness— and whatever thinking he does is devoted to the struggle of 
hiding from himself that the nature of his feelings is terror. 

“When a mystic declares that he feels the existence of a power 
superior to reason, he feels it all right, but that power is not an 
omniscient super-spirit of the universe, it is the consciousness of any 
passer-by to whom he has surrendered his own. A mystic is driven 
by the urge to impress, to cheat, to flatter, to deceive, to force that 
omnipotent consciousness of others. * They ' are his only key to reality, 
he feels that he cannot exist save by harnessing their mysterious 
power and extorting their unaccountable consent. ‘ They ’ are his only 
means of perception and, like a blind man who depends on the sight 
of a dog, he feels he must leash them in order to live. To control 
the consciousness of others becomes his only passion; power-lust is 
a weed that grows only in the vacant lots of an abandoned mind. 

‘‘Every dictator is a mystic, and every mystic is a potential dictator. 
A mystic craves obedience from men, not their agreement. He wants 
them to surrender their consciousness to his assertions, his edicts, 
his wishes, his whims— as his consciousness is surrendered to theirs. 
He wants to deal with men by means of faith and force — he finds 
no satisfaction in their consent if he must earn it by means of facts 
and reason. Reason is the enemy he dreads and, simultaneously, 
considers precarious: reason, to him, is a means of deception, he 
feels that men possess some power more potent than reason — and 
only their causeless belief or their forced obedience can give him a 
sense of security, a prool that he has gained control of the mystic 
endowment he lacked. His lust is to command, not to convince: con- 
viction requires an act of independence and rests on the absolute of 
an objective reality. What he seeks is power over reality and over 
men’s means of perceiving it, their mind, the power to interpose his 
will between existence and consciousness, as if. by agreeing to fake 
the reality he orders them to fake, men would, in fact, create it. 

“Just as the mystic is a parasite in matter, who expropriates the 
wealth created by others — just as he is a parasite in spirit, who plun- 
ders the ideas created by others — so he falls below the level of a 
lunatic who creates his own distortion of reality, to the level of a 
parasite of lunacy who seeks a distortion created by others. 

“There is only one state that fulfills the mystic's longing for infin- 
ity, non -causality, non -identity: death. No matter what unintelligible 
causes he ascribes to his incommunicable feelings, whoever rejects 
reality rejects existence — and the feelings that move him from then 
on are hatred for all the values of man’s life, and lust for all the 
evils that destroy it. A mystic relishes the spectacle of suffering, of 
poverty, subservience and terror: these give him a feeling of triumph, 
a proof of the defeat of rational reality. But no other reality exists. 

“No matter whose welfare he professes to serve, be it the welfare 
of God or ot the disembodied gargoyle he describes as 'The People,' 
no matter what ideal he proclaims in terms of some supernatural 
dimension — in fact » in reality , on earth , his ideal is death , his craving 
is to kill, his only satisfaction is to torture. 

“Destruction is the only end that the mystics' cieed has ever 

957 



achieved, as it is the only end that you see them achieving today, 
and if the ravages wrought by their acts have not made them ques- 
tion their doctrines, if they profess to be moved by love, yet are not 
deterred by piles of human corpses, it is because the truth about 
their souls is worse than the obscene excuse you have allowed them, 
the excuse that the end justifies the means and that the horrors they 
practice are means to nobler ends. The truth is that those horrors 
are their ends. 

“You who’re depraved enough to believe that you could adjust 
yourself to a mystic’s dictatorship and could please him by obeying 
his orders — there is no way to please him; when you obey, he will 
reverse his orders; he seeks obedience for the sake of obedience and 
destruction for the sake of destruction. You who are craven enough 
to believe that you can make terms with a mystic by giving in to his 
extortions — there is no way to buy him off, the bribe he wants is 
your life, as slowly or as fast as you are willing to give it up— and 
the monster he seeks to bribe is the hidden blank-out in his mind, 
which drives him to kill in order not to learn that the death he 
desires is his own. 

“You who are innocent enough to believe that the forces let loose 
in your world today are moved by greed for material plunder— the 
mystics’ scramble for spoils is only a screen to conceal from their 
mind the nature of their motive. Wealth is a means of human life, 
and they clamor for wealth in imitation of living beings, to pretend 
to themselves that they desire to live. But their swinish indulgence 
in plundered luxury is not enjoyment, it is escape. They do not want 
to own your fortune, they want you to lose it; they do not want to 
succeed, they want you to fail; they do not want to live, they want 
you to die; they desire nothing, they hate existence, and they keep 
running, each trying not to learn that the object of his hatred is 
himself. 

“You who’ve never grasped the nature of evil, you who describe 
them as 'misguided idealists' — may the God you invented forgive 
you! — they are the essence of evil, they, those anti-living objects who 
seek, by devouring the world, to till the selfless zero of their soul. It 
is not your wealth that they’re after. Theirs is a conspiracy against 
the mind, which means; against life and man. 

“It is a conspiracy without leader or direction, and the random 
little thugs of the moment who cash in on the agony of one land or 
another are chance scum riding the torrent from the broken dam of 
the sewer of centuries, from the reservoir of hatred for reason, for 
logic, for ability, for achievement, for joy, stored by every whining 
anti-human who ever preached the superiority of the ‘heart’ over 
the mind. 

“It is a conspiracy of all those who stick, not to live, but to get 
away with living , those who seek to cuf just one small corner of 
reality and are drawn, by feeling, to all* the others who are busy 
cutting other corners — a conspiracy that ^unites by links of evasion 
all those who pursue a zero as a value: the professor who, unable* 
to think, takes pleasure in crippling the minds of his students, the 
businessman who, to protect his stagnation, takes pleasure in chain- 

958 



ing the ability of competitors, the neurotic who, to defend his self- 
loathing, takes pleasure in breaking men of self-esteem, the incompe- 
tent who takes pleasure in defeating achievement, the mediocrity 
who takes pleasure in demolishing greatness, the eunuch who takes 
pleasure in the castration of all pleasure — and all their intellectual 
munition-makers, all those who preach that the immolation of virtue 
will transform vices into virtue. Death ts the premise at the root of 
their theories, death is the goal of their actions in practice — and you 
are the last of their victims. 

“We, who were the living buffers between you and the nature of 
your creed, arc no longer there to save you from the effects of your 
chosen beliefs. We are no longer willing to pay with our lives the 
debts you incurred in yours or the moral deficit piled up by all the 
generations behind you. You had been living on borrowed time — 
and 1 ani the man who has called in the loan. 

“1 am the man whose existence your blank-outs were intended to 
permit you to ignore. 1 am the man whom you did not want either 
to live or to die. You did not want me to live, because you were 
afraid of knowing that 1 carried the responsibility you dropped and 
that your lives depended upon me; you did not want me to die, 
t^eca use you knew it. 

“Twelve years ago, when 1 worked in your world, I was an inven- 
tor. 1 was one of a profession that came last in human history and 
will be first to vanish on the way back to the sub-human An inventor 
is a man who asks Why?' of the universe and lets nothing stand 
between the answer and his mind. 

“Like the man who discovered the use of steam or the man who 
discovered the use of oil, 1 discovered a source of energy which was 
available since the birth of the globe, but which men had not known 
how to use except as an object of worship, of terror and of legends 
about a thundering god. 1 completed the experimental model of a 
motor that would have made a fortune for me and for those who 
had hired me, a motor that would have raised the efficiency of every 
human installation using powei and would have added the gift of 
higher productivity to every hour you spend at earning youi living. 

“Then, one night at a factory meeting, 1 heard myself sentenced 
to death by reason of my achievement. I heard three parasites assert 
that my brain and my life were their property, that my right to exist 
was conditional and depended on the satisfaction of their desires. 
The purpose of my ability, they said, was to serve the needs of those 
who were less able. I had no right to live, they said, by reason of 
my competence for living; their right to live was unconditional, by 
reason of their incompetence. 

“Then I saw what was wrong with the world, f saw what destroyed 
men and nations, and where the bailie for life had to be fought, f 
saw that the enemy was an inverted morality — and that my sanction 
was its only power. 1 saw that evil was impotent — that evil was the 
irrational, the blind, the anti-real — and that the only weapon of its 
triumph was the willingness of the good to serve it. Just as the parasites 
around me were proclaiming their helpless dependence on my mind 
and were expecting me voluntarily to accept a slavery they had no 

959 



power to enforce, just as they were counting on my self-ifnmofation 
to provide them with the means of their plan — so throughout the 
world and throughout men’s history, in every version and form, from 
the extortions of loafing relatives to the atrocities of collective coun- 
tries. it is the good, the able, the men of reason, who act as their 
own destroyers, who transfuse to evil the blood of their virtue and 
let evil transmit to them the poison of destruction, thus gaining for 
evil the power of survival, and for their own values — the impotence 
of death. I saw that there comes a point, in the defeat of any man 
of virtue, when his own consent is needed for evil to win— and that 
no manner of injury done to him by others can succeed if he chooses 
to withhold his consent. I saw that I could put an end to your out- 
rages by pronouncing a single word in my mind. I pronounced it. 
The word was Wo. ' 

“I quit that factory, f quit your world, I made it my job to warn 
your victims and to give them the method and the weapon to fight 
you. The method was to refuse to dellect retribution. The weapon 
was justice. 

“If you want to know what you lost when I quit and when my 
strikers deserted your world — stand on an empty stretch ol soil in a 
wilderness unexplored by men and ask yourself what manner of sur- 
vival you would achieve and how long you would last it you retused 
to think, with no one around to teach you the motions, or, if you 
chose to think, how much your mind would be able to discover— 
ask yourself how many independent conclusions you have reached 
in the course of your life and how much of your time was spent on 
performing the actions you (earned Irom others — ask yourself 
whether you would be able to discover how to till the soil and grow 
your food, whether you would be able to invent a wheel, a lever, an 
induction coil, a generator, an electronic tube— then decide whether 
men of ability are exploiters who live by the fruit of vour labor and 
rob you of the wealth that vou produce, and whether you dare to 
believe that you possess the power to enslave them. Let your women 
take a look at a jungle female with her shriveled face and pendulous 
breasts, as she sits grinding meal in a bowl, hour after hour, century 
by century— then let them ask themselves whether their ‘instinct of 
tool-making’ will piovide them with their electric relngcralors, their 
washing machines and vacuum cleaners, and, if not, whether they 
care to destroy those who provided it all, but not ‘by instinct.’ 

“Take a look around you, you savages who stutter that ideas are 
created by men’s means of production, that a machine is not the 
product of human thought, but a mystical power that produces 
human thinking. You have never discovered the industrial age — and 
you ding to the morality of the barbarian eras when a miserable 
form of human subsistence was produced^ by the muscular labor of 
slaves. Every mystic had always longed |or slaves, to protect .him 
from the material reality he dreaded. Bui you, you grotesque little 
atavists, stare blindly at the skyscrapers anil smokestacks around you 
and dream of enslaving the material providers who are scientists, 
inventors, industrialists. When you clamor for public ownership of 
the means of production, you are clamoring for public ownership of 

960 



the mind. I have taught my strikers that the answer you deserve is 
only: ‘Try and get it.’ 

“You proclaim yourself unable to harness the forces of inanimate 
matter, yet propose to harness the minds of men who are able to 
achieve the feats you cannot equal. You proclaim that you cannot 
survive without us, yet propose to dictate the terms of our survival. 
You proclaim that you need us, yet indulge the impertinence of 
asserting your right to rule us by force— and expect that we, who 
are not afraid of that physical nature which fills you with terror, will 
cower at the sight of any lout who has talked you into voting him a 
chance to command us. 

“You propose to establish a social order based on the following 
tenets: that you’re incompetent to run your own life, but competent 
to run the lives of others— that you're unfit to exist in freedom, but 
fit to become an omnipotent ruler — that you're unable to earn your 
living by the use of your own intelligence, but able to judge politi- 
cians and to vote them into jobs of total power over arts you have 
never seen, over sciences you have never studied, over achievements 
of which you have no knowledge, over the gigantic industries where 
you, by your own definition of your capacity, would be unable suc- 
cessfully to fill the job of assistant greaser. 

"This idol of your cult of zero-worship, this symbol of impotence — 
the congenital dependent — is your image of man and your standard 
of value, m whose likeness you strive to refashion your soul. 'It's 
only human,’ you cry in defense of any depravity, reaching the stage 
of self-abasement where you seek to make the concept 'human' mean 
the weakling, the fool, the rotter, the liar, the failure, the coward, 
the fraud, and to exile from the human race the hero, the thinker, the 
producer, the inventor, the strong, the purposeful, the pure — as if 
‘to feel’ were human, but to think were not, as if to fail were human, 
but to succeed were not. as if corruption were human, but virtue 
were not — as if the premise of death were proper to man. but the 
premise of life were not. 

“In order to deprive us of honor, that you may then deprive us 
of our wealth, you have always regarded us as slaves who deserve 
no moral recognition. You praise any venture that claims to be non- 
profit, and damn the men who made the profits that make the ven- 
ture possible. You regard as ‘in the public interest’ any project 
serving those who do not pay; it is not in the public interest to 
provide any services for those who do the paying. ‘Public benefit* is 
anything given as alms; to engage in trade is to injure the public. 
‘Public welfare’ is the welfare of those who do not earn it; those 
who do, are entitled to no welfare. 'The public to you, is whoever 
has failed to achieve any virtue or value; whoever achieves it, who- 
ever provides the goods you require for survival, ceases to be re- 
garded as part of the public or as part of the human race. 

“What blank-out permitted you to hope that you could gel away 
with this muck of contradictions and to plan it as an ideal society, 
when the *No’ of your victims was sufficient to demolish the whole 
of your structure? What permits any insolent beggar to wave his 
sores in the face of his betters and to plead for help in the tone of 

961 



a threat? You cry, as he does, that you are counting on our pity, 
but your secret hope is the moral code that has taught you to count 
on our guilt. You expect us to feel guilty of our virtues in the pres* 
ence of your vices, wounds and failures — guilty of succeeding at exis- 
tence, guilty of enjoying the life that you damn, yet beg us to help 
you to live. 

“Did you want to know who is John Galt? I am the first man of 
ability who refused to regard it as guilt. I am the first man who 
would not do penance for my virtues or let them be used as the 
tools of my destruction. I am the first man who would not suffer 
martyrdom at the hands of those who wished me to perish for the 
privilege of keeping them alive. I am the first man who told them 
that I did not need them, and until they learned to deal with me as 
traders, giving value for value, they would have to exist without me, 
as I would exist without them; then I would let them learn whose is 
the need and whose the ability — and if human survival is the stan- 
dard, whose terms would set the way to survive, 

“I have done by plan and intention what has been done through- 
out history by silent default. There have always been men of intelli- 
gence who went on strike, in protest and despair, but they did not 
know the meaning of their action. The man who retires from public 
life, to think, but not to share his thoughts — the man who chooses 
to spend his years in the obscurity of menial employment, keeping 
to himself the fire of his mind, never giving it form, expression or 
reality, refusing to biing it into a world he despises — the man who 
is defeated by revulsion, the man who renounces before he has 
started, the man who gives up rather than give in, the man who 
functions at a fraction of his capacity, disarmed by his longing for 
an ideal he has not found— they are on strike, on strike against 
unreason, on strike against your world and your values. But not 
knowing any values of their own, they abandon the quest to know — 
in the darkness of their hopeless indignation, which is righteous with- 
out knowledge ol the nght, and passionate without knowledge of 
desire, they concede to you the power of reality and surrender the 
incentives of their mind — and they perish in bitter futility, as rebels 
who never learned the object of their rebellion, as lovers who never 
discovered their love. 

‘'The infamous times you call the Dark Ages were an era of intelli- 
gence on strike, when men of ability went underground and lived 
undiscovered, studying in secret, and died, destroying the works of 
their mind, when only a few of the bravest of martyrs remained to 
keep the human race alive. Every period ruled by mystics was an 
era of stagnation and want, when most nfren were on strike against 
existence, working for less than their barest survival, leaving nothing 
but scraps for their rulers to loot, refusing to think, to venture, to 
produce, when the ultimate collector of jtheir profits and the final 
authority on truth or error was the whim iof some gilded degenerate 
sanctioned as superior to reason by divide right and by grace of a 
club. The road of human history was a i string of blank-outs over 
sterile stretches eroded by faith and fotcc, with only a few brief 
bursts of sunlight, when the released energy of the men of the mind 

962 



performed the wonders you gaped at, admired and promptly extin- 
guished again. 

“But there will be no extinction, this time. The game of the mystics 
is up. You will perish in and by your own unreality. We, the men 
of reason, will survive. 

“I have called out on strike the kind of martyrs who had never 
deserted you before. I have given them the weapon they had lacked: 
the knowledge of their own moral value. I have taught them that 
the world is ours, whenever we choose to claim it, by virtue and 
grace of the fact that ours is the Morality of Life. They, the great 
victims who had produced all the wonders of humanity’s brief sum- 
mer, they, the industrialists, the conquerors of matter, had not dis- 
covered the nature of their right. They had known that theirs was 
the power. I taught them that theirs was the glory. 

“You, who dare to regard us as the moral inferiors of any mystic 
who claims supernatural visions— you, who scramble like vultures for 
plundered pennies, yet honor a fortune-teller above a fortune- 
maker — you, who scorn a businessman as ignoble, but esteem any 
posturing artist as exalted — the root ol your standards is that mystic 
miasma which comes from primordial swamps, that cult of death, 
which pronounces a businessman immoral by reason of the fact that 
he keeps you alive. You, who claim that you long to lise above the 
crude concerns of the body, above the drudgery of serving mere 
physical needs — who is enslaved by physical needs: the Hindu who 
labors from sunrise to sunset at the shafts of a hand-plow for a bowl 
ol rice, or the American who is driving a tractor* 1 Who is the con- 
queror of physical reality: the man who sleeps on a bed of nails or 
the man who sleeps on an inner-spring mattress'* Which is the monu- 
ment to the triumph of the human spirit over matter: the germ-eaten 
hovels on the shorelines of the Ganges or the Atlantic skyline of 
New York? 

“Unless you learn the answers to these questions- -and learn to 
stand at reverent attention when you face the achievements of man’s 
mind — you will not stay much longer on (his earth, which we love 
and will not permit you to damn. You will not sneak by with the 
rest of your lifespan. I have foreshortened the usual course of history 
and have let you discover the nature oi the payment you had hoped 
to switch to the shoulders of others. It is the last of your own living 
power that will now be drained to provide the unearned for the 
worshippers and carriers of Death. Do not pretend that a malevolent 
reality defeated you — you were defeated by your own evasions. Do 
not pretend that you will perish for a noble ideal —you will perish 
as fodder for the haters of man. 

“But to those of you who still retain a remnant of the dignity and 
will to love one’s life, I am offering the chance to make a choice. 
C hoose whether you wish to perish for a morality you have never 
believed or practiced. Pause on the brink of self-destruction and 
examine your values and your life. You had known how to take an 
inventory of your wealth. Now take an inventory of your mind. 

“Since childhood, you have been hiding the guilty secret that you 
feel no desire to be moral, no desire to seek self-immolation, that 

963 



you dread and hate your code, but dare not say it evert to yourself, 
that you’re devoid of those moral Instincts' which others profess to 
feel The less you felt, the louder you proclaimed your selfless love 
and servitude to others, in dread of ever letting them discover your 
own self, the self that you betrayed, the self that you kept in conceal- 
ment, like a skeleton in the closet of your body. And they, who were 
at once your dupes and your deceivers, they listened and voiced their 
loud approval, in dread of ever letting you discover that they were 
harboring the same unspoken secret. Existence among you is a giant 
pretense, an act you all perform for one another, each feeling that 
he is the only guilty freak, each placing his moral authority in the 
unknowable known only to others, each faking the reality he feels 
they expect him to fake, none having the courage to break the vi- 
cious circle. 

“No matter what dishonorable compromise you've made with your 
impracticable creed, no matter what miserable balance, half-cynicism, 
half-superstition, you now manage to maintain, you still preserve the 
root, the lethal tenet: the belief that the moral and the practical are 
opposites. Since childhood, you have been running from the terror 
of a choice you have never dared fully to identify: If the practical , 
whatever you must practice to exist, whatever works, succeeds, 
achieves your purpose, whatever brings you food and joy, whatever 
profits you, is evil — and if the good, the moral, is the impractical , 
whatever fails, destroys, frustrates, whatever injures you and brings 
you loss or pain — then your choice is to be moral or to live. 

“The sole result of that murderous doctrine was to remove moral- 
ity from life. You grew up to believe that moral laws bear no relation 
to the job of living, except as an impediment and threat, that man's 
existence is an amoral jungle where anything goes and anything 
works. And in that fog of switching definitions which descends upon 
a frozen mind, you have forgotten that the evils damned by your 
creed were the virtues required for living, and you have come to 
believe that actual evils arc the practical means of existence. Forget- 
ting that the impractical good’ was self-sacrifice, you believe that 
self-esteem is impractical; forgetting that the practical ‘evil' was pro- 
duction, you believe that robbery is practical. 

“Swinging like a helpless branch in the wind of an uncharted moral 
wilderness, you dare not fully to be evil or fully to live. When you 
are honest, you feel the resentment of a sucker; when you cheat, 
you feel terror and shame, your pain is augmented by the feeling 
that pain is your natural state. You pity the men you admire, you 
believe they are doomed to fail; you e$nvy the men you hate, you 
believe they are the masters of existence. You feel disarmed when 
you come up against a scoundrel: you t>elieve that evil is bound to 
win, since the moral is the impotent, thje impractical - 

“Morality, to you, is a phantom scarecrow made of duty, of bore- 
dom, of punishment, of pain, a cross-breed between the first school- 
teacher of your past and the tax collector of your present, a 
scarecrow standing in a barren field, having a stick to chase away 
your pleasures — and pleasure , to you, is a liquor-soggy brain, a mind- 

964 



less slut, the stupor of a moron who stakes his cash on some animals' 
race, since pleasure cannot be moral. 

“If you identify your actual belief, you will find a triple damna- 
tion — of yourself, of life, of virtue — in the grotesque conclusion you 
have reached: you believe that morality is a necessary evil. 

“Do you wonder why you live without dignity, love without fire 
and die without resistance? Do you wonder why, wherever you look, 
you see nothing but unanswerable questions, why your life is torn 
by impossible conflicts, why you spend it straddling irrational fences 
to evade artificial choices; such as soul or body, mind or heart, secu- 
rity or freedom, private profit or public good? 

“Do you cry that you find no answcis? By what means did you 
hope to find them? You reject your tool of perception — your mind- 
then complain that the universe is a mystery. You discard your key, 
then wail that all doors are locked against you. You start out in 
pursuit of the irrational, then damn existence tor making no sense. 

“The fence you have been sti addling for two hours— while hearing 
my words and seeking to escape them — is the coward’s formula con- 
tained in the sentence ‘But we don’t have to go to extremes!’ The 
extreme you have always struggled to avoid is the recognition that 
reality is final, that A is A and that the truth is true. A moral code 
impossible to practice, a code that demands imperfection or death, 
has taught you to dissolve all ideas in fog, to permit no firm defini- 
tions, to regard any concept as approximate and any rule of conduct 
as elastic, to hedge on any principle, to compromise on any value, 
to take the middle of any road. By extorting your acceptance of 
supernatural absolutes, it has forced you to reject the absolute of 
nature By making moral judgments impossible, it has made you 
incapable of rational judgment. A code that forbids you to cast the 
first stone, has forbidden you to admit the identity of stones and to 
know when or it you’re being stoned. 

“The man who refuses to judge, who neither agiees nor disagrees, 
who declares that there are no absolutes and believes that he escapes 
responsibility, is the man responsible for all the blood that is now 
spilled in the world. Reality is an absolute, existence is an absolute, 
a speck of dust is an absolute and so is a human life. Whether you 
live or die is an absolute. Whether you have a piece of bread or not. 
is an absolute. Whether you eat youi bread or see it vanish into a 
looter’s stomach, is an absolute. 

“There are two sides to every issue: one side is right and the other 
is wrong, but the middle is always evil. The man who is wrong still 
retains some respect for truth, if only by accepting the responsibility 
ot choice. But the man in the middle is the knave who blanks out 
the truth in order to pretend that no choice or values exist, who is 
willing to sit out the course of any battle, willing to cash in on the 
blood of the innocent or to crawl on his belly to the guilty, who 
dispenses justice by condemning both the robber and the robbed to 
tail, who solves conflicts by ordering the thinker and the foot to meet 
each other halfway. In any compromise between food and poison, it 
is only death that can win. In any compromise between good and 
evil, it is only evil that can profit. In that transfusion of blood which 

965 



drains the good to feed the evil, the compromiser is the transmitting 
rubber tube. 

“You, who are half-rational, half-coward, have been playing a con 
game with reality, but the victim you have conned is yourself. When 
men reduce their virtues to the approximate, then evil acquires the 
force of an absolute, when loyalty to an unyielding purpose is 
dropped by the virtuous, it’s picked up by scoundrels — and you get 
the indecent spectacle of a cringing, bargaining, traitorous good and 
a self-righteously uncompromising evil. As you surrendered to the 
mystics of muscle when they told you that ignorance consists of 
claiming knowledge, so now you surrender to them when they shriek 
that immorality consists of pronouncing moral judgment. When they 
yell that it is seltish to be certain that you are right, you hasten to 
assure them that you’re certain of nothing. When they shout that it’s 
immoral to stand on your convictions, you assure them that you have 
no convictions whatever. When the thugs of Europe’s People’s States 
snarl that you are guilty of intolerance, because you don't treat your 
desire to live and their desire to kill you as a difference of opinion — 
you cringe and hasten to assure them that you are not intolerant of 
any horror. When some barefoot bum in some pesthole of Asia yells 
at you: How dare you be rich — you apologize and beg him to be 
patient and promise him you’ll give it all away. 

“You have reached the blind alley of the treason you committed 
when you agreed that you had no right to exist. Once, you believed 
it was ‘only a compromise’: you conceded it was evil to live for 
yourself, but moral to live for the sake ot your children. Then you 
conceded that it was seltish to live for your children, but moral to 
live for your community. Then you conceded that it was selfish to 
live for your community, but moral to live for your country. Now, 
you are letting this greatest of countries be devoured by any scum 
from any corner of the earth, while you concede that it is selfish to 
live for your country and that your moral duty is to live for the 
globe. A man who has no right to life, has no right to values and 
will not keep them. 

“At the end of your road of successive betrayals, stripped of weap- 
ons, of certainty, of honor, you commit your final act of treason and 
sign your petition of intellectual bankruptcy: while the muscle-mys- 
tics of the People’s vStates proclaim that they Ye the champions of 
reason and science, you agree and hasten to proclaim that faith is 
your cardinal principle, that reason is on the side of your destroyers, 
but youis is the side of faith. To the struggling remnants of raiionat 
honesty in the twisted, bewildered minds of your children, you de- 
clare that you can offer no rational argument to support the ideas 
that created this country, that there is jno rational justification for 
freedom, for property, for justice, for frights, that they rest on a 
mystical insight and can be accepted oply on faith, that in reason 
and logic the enemy is right, but taith .is superior to reason. You 
declare to your children that it is rational to loot, to torture, (o 
enslave, to expropriate, to murder, but that they must resist the 
temptations of logic and stick to the discipline of remaining irratio- 
nal— that skyscrapers, factories, radios, airplanes were the products 

%6 



of faith and mystic intuition, while famines, concentration camps 
and firing squads arc the products of a reasonable manner of exis- 
tence— that the industrial revolution was the revolt of the men of 
faith against that era of reason and logic which is known as the 
Middle Ages. Simultaneously, in the same breath, to the same child 
you declare that the looters who rule the People’s States will surpass 
this country in material production, since they are the representatives 
of science, but that it’s evil to be concerned with physical wealth 
and that one must renounce material prosperity— vou declare that 
the looters’ ideals are noble, but they do not mean^them, while you 
do: that your purpose in fighting the looters is only to accomplish 
their aims, which they cannot accomplish, but you can; and that the 
way to fight them is to beat them to it and give one's wealth away 
Then you wonder why your children join the People's thugs or be- 
come half-crazed delinquents, you wonder why the looters’ conquests 
keep creeping closer to your doors -and you blame it on human 
stupidity, declaring that the masses are impervious to reason. 

“You blank out the open, public spectacle of the looters' fight 
against the mind, and the fact that their bloodiest, horrors are un- 
leashed to punish the enme of thinking. You blank out the fact that 
most mystics of muscle started out as mystics of spirit, that they keep 
switching from one to the other, that the men you call materialists and 
spiritualists are only two halves of the same dissected human, forever 
seeking completion, but seeking it by swinging from the destruction 
of the flesh to the destruction of the soul and vice versa — that thev 
keep running from your colleges to the slave pens of Europe to art 
open collapse into the mystic muck of India, seeking any refuge 
against reality, any form of escape from the mind. 

“You blank it out and cling to your hypocrisy of ‘faith* in order 
to blank out the knowledge that the looters have a stranglehold upon 
you, which consists of your moral code— that the looters are the final 
and consistent practitioners of the morality you're half-obeying, half- 
e\ading — that they practice it the only way n can be practiced: by 
turning the eaith into a sacrificial furnace — that >our morality forbids 
you to oppose them in the only way they can be opposed: by refusing 
to become a sacrificial animal and proudly asserting your right to 
exist— that in order to tight them to the finish and with full rectitude, 
it is your morality that you have to reject . 

“You blank it out. because your self-esteem is tied to that mystic 
‘unselfishness’ which you've never possessed or practiced, but spent 
so many years pretending to possess that the thought of denouncing 
it fills you with terror. No value is higher than self-esteem, but you've 
invested it in counterfeit securities — and now your morality has 
caught you in a trap where you are forced to protect your self-esteem 
by fighting for the creed of self-destruction. The grim joke is on you: 
that need of self-esteem, which you’re unable to explain or to define, 
belongs to my morality, not yours; it's the objective token of my 
code, it is my proof within your own soul. 

“By a feeling he has not learned to identify, but has derived from 
fits first awareness of existence, from his discovery that he has to 
wake choices, man knows that his desperate need of self-esteem is 

967 



a matter of life or death. As a being of volitional consciousness, he 
knows that he must know his own value in order to maintain his 
own life. He knows that he has to be right, to be wrong in action 
means danger to his life; to be wrong in person, to be evil, means 
to be unfit for existence. 

‘‘Every act of man’s life has to be willed; the mere act of obtaining 
or eating his food implies that the person he preserves is worthy of 
being preserved; every pleasure he seeks to enjoy implies that the 
person who seeks it is worthy of finding enjoyment. He has no choice 
about his need of self-esteem, his only choice is the standard by 
which to gauge it. And he makes his fatal error when he switches 
this gauge protecting his life into the service of his own destruction, 
when he chooses a standard contradicting existence and sets his self- 
esteem against reality. 

“Every form of causeless self-doubt, every feeling of inferiority 
and secret unworthiness is, in fact, man’s hidden dread of his inability 
to deal with existence. But the greater his terror, the more fiercely 
he clings to the murderous doctrines that choke him. No man can 
survive the moment of pronouncing himself irredeemably evil; should 
he do it, his next moment is insanity or suicide. To escape it — if he’s 
chosen an irrational standard — he will fake, evade, blank out; he will 
cheat himself of reality, of existence, of happiness, of mind; and he 
will ultimately cheat himself of self-esteem by struggling to preserve 
its illusion rather than to risk discovering its lack. To fear to face an 
issue is to believe that the worst is true. 

‘it is not any crime you have committed that infects your soul 
with permanent guilt, it is none of your failures, errors or Haws, but 
the blank-out by which you attempt to evade them — it is not any 
sort of Original Sin or unknown prenatal deficiency, but the knowl- 
edge and fact of your basic default, of suspending your mind, of 
refusing to think. Fear and guilt are your chronic emotions, they are 
real and you do deserve them, but they don’t come from the superfi- 
cial reasons you invent to disguise their cause, not from your 
‘selfishness,’ weakness or ignorance, but from a real and basic threat 
to your existence; fear , because you have abandoned your weapon 
of survival, guilt, because you know you have done it volitionally. 

“The self you have betrayed is your mind; self-esteem is reliance 
on one’s power to think. The ego you seek, that essential ‘you’ which 
you cannot express or define, is not your emotions or inarticulate 
dreams, but your intellect , that judge of your supreme tribunal whom 
you’ve impeached in order to drift at the mercy of any stray shyster 
you describe as your ‘feeling.’ Then you drag yourself through a self- 
made night, in a desperate quest for a nameless fire, moved by some 
fading vision of a dawn you had seen an£l lost. 

“Observe the persistence, in mankind’^ mythologies, of the legend 
about a paradise that men had once possessed, the city of Atlantis 
or the Garden of Eden or some kingdom of perfection, always be- 
hind us. The root of that legend exists, pot in the past of the race, 
but in the past of every man. You still retain a sense — not as firm 
as a memory, but diffused like the paiii of hopeless longing — that 
somewhere in the starting years of your childhood, before you had 

968 



teamed to submit, to absorb the terror of unreason and to doubt the 
value of your mind, you had known a radiant state of existence, you 
had known the independence of a rational consciousness facing an 
open universe. That is the paradise which you have lost, which you 
seek — which is yours for the taking. 

“Some of you will never know who is John Galt. But those of you 
who have known a single moment of love for existence and of pride 
in being its worthy lover, a moment of looking at this earth and 
letting your glance be its sanction, have known the state of being a 
man, and I — I am only the man who knew that that state is not to 
be betrayed. 1 am the man who knew what made it possible and 
who chose consistently to practice and to be what you had practiced 
and been in that one moment. 

“That choice is yours to make. That choice — the dedication to 
one’s highest potential — is made by accepting the fact that the no- 
blest act you have ever performed is the act of your mind in the 
process of grasping that two and two make four. 

“Whoever you are— you who are alone with my words in this 
moment, with nothing but your honesty to help you understand — 
the choice is still open to be a human being, but the price is to start 
Irom scratch, to stand naked in the face of reality and, reversing a 
costly historical error, to declare: *1 am, therefore I’ll think.' 

“Accept the irrevocable fact that your life depends upon your 
mind. Admit that the whole of your struggle, your doubts, your fakes, 
your evasions, was a desperate quest for escape from the responsibil- 
ity of a volitional consciousness — a quest for automatic knowledge, 
for instinctive action, for intuitive certainty — and while you called it 
a longing for the state of an angel, what you were seeking was the 
state of an animal. Accept, as your moral ideal, the task of becoming 
a man. 

“Do not say that you're afraid to trust your mind because you 
know so little. Are you safer in surrendering to mystics and dis- 
carding the little that you know? Live and act within the limit of 
your knowledge and keep expanding it to the limit of your lif^. 
Redeem your mind from the hockshops of authority. Accept the fact 
that you arc not omniscient, but playing a zombie will not give you 
omniscience — that your mind is fallible, but becoming mindless will 
not make you infallible — that an error made on your own is safer 
than ten truths accepted on faith, because the first leaves you the 
means to correct it, but the second destroys your capacity to distin- 
guish truth from error. In place of your dream of an omniscient 
automaton, accept the fact that any knowledge man acquires is ac- 
quired by his own will and effort, and that that is his distinction in 
the universe, that is his nature, his morality, his glory. 

“Discard that unlimited license to evil which consists of claiming 
that man is imperfect. By what standard do you damn him when 
you claim it? Accept the fact that in the realm of morality nothing 
less than perfection will do. But perfection is not to be gauged by 
mystic commandments to practice the impossible, and your moral 
stature is not to be gauged by matters not open to your choice. Man 
has a single basic choice: to think or not, and that is the gauge of 

969 



his virtue. Moral perfection is an unbreached rationality — not the 
degree of your intelligence, but the full and relentless use of your 
mind, not the extent of your knowledge, but the acceptance of reason 
as an absolute. 

“Learn to distinguish the difference between errors of knowledge 
and breaches of morality. An error of knowledge is not a moral flaw, 
provided you are willing to correct it; only a mystic would judge 
human beings by the standard of an impossible, automatic omni- 
science. But a breach of morality is the conscious choice of an action 
you know to be evil, or a willful evasion of knowledge, a suspension 
of sight and of thought. That which you do not know, is not a moral 
charge against you; but that which you refuse to know, is an account 
of infamy growing in your soul. Make every allowance for errors of 
knowledge; do not forgive or accept any breach of morality. Give 
the benefit of the doubt to those who seek to know, but treat as 
potential killers those specimens of insolent depravity who make 
demands upon you, announcing that they have and seek no reasons, 
proclaiming, as a license, that they ‘just feel it’ — or those who reject 
an irrefutable argument by saying: ‘It's only logic.' which means: ‘It’s 
only reality.' ihe only realm opposed to reality is the realm and 
premise of death. 

“Accept the fact that the achievement of your happiness is the 
only moral purpose of your life, and that happiness — not pain or 
mindless self-indulgence — is the proof of your moral integrity, since 
it is the proof and the result of your loyalty to the achievement of 
your values. Happiness was the responsibility you dreaded, it re- 
quired the kind of rational discipline you did not value yoursell 
enough to assume— and the anxious staleness of your days is the 
monument to your evasion of the knowledge that there is no moral 
substitute for happiness, that there is no more despicable coward 
than the man who deserted the battle for his joy. fearing to assert 
his right to existence, lacking the courage and the loyalty to life of 
a bird or a flower reaching for the sun. Discard the protective rags 
of that vice which you called a virtue: humility — learn to value your- 
self, which means: to tight for your happiness — and when you learn 
that pride is the sum of all virtues, you will learn to live like a man. 

“As a basic step of self-esteem, learn to treat as the mark of a 
cannibal any man's demand for your help. To demand it is to claim 
that your life is his property — and loathsome as such claim might 
be, there's something still more loathsome: your agreement. Do you 
ask if it's ever proper to help another man? No — if he claims it as 
his right or as a moral duty that you owe him. Yes — if such is your 
own desire based on your own selfish pleasure in the value of his 
person and his struggle. Suffering as such i$ not a value; only man’s 
fight against suffering, is. If you choose to*help a man who suffers, 
do it only on the ground of his virtues, of His fight to recover, of his 
rational record, or of the fact that he sujffers unjustly: then your 
action is still a trade, and his virtue is th<| payment for your help. 
But to help a man who has no virtues, to help him on the ground 
of his suffering as such, to accept his faults, his need, as a claim — is 
to accept the mortgage of a zero on your values. A man who has 

970 



no virtues is a hater of existence who acts on the premise of death; 
to help him is to sanction his evil and to support his career of de- 
struction. Be it only a penny you will not miss or a kindly smile he 
has not earned, a tribute to a zero is treason to life and to all those 
who struggle to maintain it. It is of such pennies and smiles that the 
desolation of your world was made. 

“Do not say that my morality is too hard for you to practice and 
that you tear it as you fear the unknown. Whatever living moments 
you have known, were lived by the values of my code. But you 
stifled, negated, betrayed it. You kept sacrificing your virtues to your 
vices, and the best among men to the worst. Look around you: what 
you have done to society, you have done it first within your soul; 
one is the image of the other. This dismal wreckage, which is now 
your world, is the physical form of the treason you committed to your 
values, to your friends, to your dclcnders, to your tuture. to your 
country, to yourself. 

“We — whom you arc now calling, but who will not answer any 
longer— we have lived among you, but you failed to know us, you 
refused to think and to see what we were. You failed to recognize 
the motor I invented — and it became, in your world, a pile of dead 
scrap. You failed to recognize the hero in your soul — and you failed 
to know me when 1 passed you in the street. When you cried in 
despair for the unattainable spirit which you felt had deserted your 
world, you gave it my name, but what you were calling was your own 
betrayed self-esteem. You will not recover one without the other. 

“When you failed to give recognition to man’s mind and attempted 
to rule human beings by force —those who submitted had no mind 
to surrender, those who had, were men who don't submit. Thus the 
man of productive genius assumed in your world the disguise of a 
playboy and became a destroyer of wealth, choosing to annihilate 
his fortune rather than surrender it to guns. Thus the thinker, the 
man of reason, assumed in your world the role of a pirate, to defend 
his values by force against your foiee, rather than submit to the 
rule of brutality. Do you hear me, Fiancisco d'Anconia and Ragnar 
Danneskjold, my first friends, my fellow fighters, my fellow outcasts, 
in whose name and honor 1 speak? 

“It was the three of us who started what 1 am now completing. It 
was the three of us who resolved <o avenge this country and to 
release its imprisoned soul. This greatest of countries was built on 
my morality — on the inviolate suptemucy of man’s right to exist— 
but you dreaded to admit it and live up to it. You stared at an 
achievement unequaled in history, and looted its effects and blanked 
out its cause. In the presence of that monument to human morality, 
which is a factory, a highway or a bridge — you kept damning this 
country as immoral and its progress as material greed,' you kept 
offering apologies for this country’s greatness to the idol of primor- 
dial starvation, to decaying Europe's idol of a leprous, mystic bum. 

“This country — the product of reason — could not survive on the 
morality of sacrifice. It was not built by men who sought self- 
immolation or by men who sought handouts. It could not stand on 
Ihe mystic split that divorced man's soul from his body. It could not 

971 



live by the mystic doctrine that damned this earth as evil and those 
who succeeded on earth as depraved. From its start, this country was 
a threat to the ancient rule of mystics. In the brilliant rocket-explo- 
sion of its youth, this country displayed to an incredulous world what 
greatness was possible to man, what happiness was possible on earth. 
It was one or the other: America or mystics. The mystics knew it; 
you didn't. You let them infect you with the worship of need — and 
this country became a giant in body with a mooching midget in place 
of its soul, while its living soul was driven underground to labor and 
feed you in silence, unnamed, unhonored, negated, its soul and hero: 
the industrialist. Do you hear me now. Hank Rearden, the greatest 
of the victims 1 have avenged? 

“Neither he nor the rest of us will return until the road is clear 
to rebuild this country — until the wreckage of the morality of sacri- 
fice has been wiped out of our way, A country’s political system is 
based on its code of morality. We will lebuild America’s system on 
the moral premise which had been its foundation, but which you 
treated as a guilty underground, in your frantic evasion of the conflict 
between that premise and your mystic morality: the premise that 
man is an end in himself, not the means to the ends of others, that 
man’s life, his freedom, his happiness are his by inalienable right. 

“You who've lost the concept of a right, you who swing m impo- 
tent evasiveness between the claim that rights arc a gilt of God, a 
supernatural gift to be taken on faith, or the claim that rights are a 
gift of society, to be broken at its arbitrary whim-* the source of 
man’s rights is not divine law' or congressional law', but the law of 
identity. A is A — and Man is Man. Rights are conditions ol existence 
required by man’s nature for his proper survival. It man is to live 
on earth, it is right for him to use his mind, it is right to act on his 
own free judgment, it is right to work for his values and to keep the 
product of his work. If life on earth is his purpose, ho has a right to 
live as a rational being: nature torbids him the irrational. Any group, 
any gang, any nation that attempts to negate man’s rights, is wrong, 
which means: is evil, which means*, is anti-life. 

“ Rights are a moral concept — and morality is a matter of choice. 
Men are free not to choose man’s survival as the standard of their 
morals and their laws, but not free to escape from the fact that the 
alternative is a cannibal society, which exists for a while by devouring 
its best and collapses like a cancerous body, when the healthy have 
been eaten by the diseased, when the rational have been consumed 
by the irrational. Such has been the fate of your societies in history, 
but you’ve evaded the knowledge of the cjiuse. I am here to state 
it: the agent of retribution was the law of identity, which you cannot 
escape. Just as man cannot live by means of the irrational, so two 
men cannot, or two thousand, or two billion. Just as man can’t suc- 
ceed by defying reality, so a nation can’t, ^r a country, or a globe. 
A is A. The rest is a matter of time, provided by the generosity 
of victims. * 

“Just as man can’t exist without his body, so no rights can exist 
without the right to translate one’s rights into reality — to think, to 
work and to keep the results— which means: the right of property. 

972 



The modern mystics of muscle who offer you the fraudulent alterna- 
tive of * human rights* versus ‘property rights,’ as if one could exist 
without the other, are making a last, grotesque attempt to revive the 
doctrine of soul versus body. Only a ghost can exist without material 
property; only a slave can work with no right to the product of his 
effort. The doctrine that ‘human rights’ are superior to ‘property 
rights’ simply means that some human beings have the right to make 
property out of others; since the competent have nothing to gain 
from the incompetent, it means the right of the incompetent to own 
their betters and to use them as productive cattle Whoever regards 
this as human and right, has no right to the title of ‘human.’ 

“The source of property rights is the law of causality. All property 
and all forms of wealth are produced by man’s mind and labor. As 
you cannot have effects without causes, so you cannot have wealth 
without its source: without intelligence. You cannot force intelligence 
to work: those who’re able to think, will not work under compulsion; 
those who will, won’t produce much more than the price of the whip 
needed to keep them enslaved. You cannot obtain the products of 
a mind except on the owner’s terms, by trade and by volitional con- 
sent. Any other policy of men toward man's property is the policy 
of criminals, no matter what their numbers. Criminals are savages 
who play it short-range and starve when their prey runs out— just as 
you're starving today, you who believed that crime could be ‘practi- 
cal’ if >our government decreed that robbery was legal and resistance 
to robbery illegal. 

“The only proper purpose of a government is to protect man's 
rights, which means: to protect him from physical violence. A proper 
government is only a policeman, acting as an agent of man's self- 
defense. and, as such, may resort to force only against those who 
start the use of force. The only proper functions of a government 
arc: the police, to protect you from criminals, the army, to protect 
you from foreign invaders; and the courts, to protect vour property 
and contracts from breach or fraud by others, to settle disputes by 
rational rules, according to objective law. Bui a government that 
initiates the employment of force against men who had forced no 
one, the employment of armed compulsion against disarmed victims, 
is a nightmare infernal machine designed to annihilate morality; such 
a government reverses Us only moral purpose and switches from the 
role of protector to the role of man s deadliest enemy, from the role 
of policeman to the role of a criminal vested with the right to the 
wielding of violence against victims depnved of the right of self- 
defense. Such a government substitutes for morality the following 
rule of social conduct: you may do whatever you please to your 
neighbor, provided your gang is bigger than his. 

“Only a brute, a fool or an evader can agree to exist on such 
terms or agree to give his fellow men a blank check on his life and 
his mind, to accept the belief that others have the right to dispose 
of his person at their whim, that the will of the majority is omnipo- 
tent, that the physical force of muscles and numbers is a substitute 
for justice, reality and truth. We, the men of the mind, we who are 

973 



traders, not masters or slaves, do not deal in blank checks or grant 
them. We do not live or work with any form of the non-objective. 

“So long as men, in the era of savagery, had no concept of objec- 
tive reality and believed that physical nature was ruled by the whim 
of unknowable demons — no thought, no science, no production were 
possible. Only when men discovered that nature was a firm, predict- 
able absolute were they able to rely on their knowledge, to choose 
their course, to plan their future and, slowly, to rise from the cave. 
Now you have placed modern industry, with its immense complexity 
of scientific precision, back into the power of unknowable demons — 
the unpredictable power of the arbitrary whims of hidden, ugly little 
bureaucrats. A farmer will not invest the eftort of one summer if 
he*s unable to calculate his chances of a harvest. But you expect 
industrial giants — who plan in terms of decades, invest in terms of 
generations and undertake ninety-nine-year contracts— to continue 
to function and produce, not knowing what random caprice in the 
skull of what random official will descend upon them at what mo- 
ment to demolish the whole of their effort. Drifters and physical 
laborers live and plan by the range of a day. The better the mind, 
the longer the range. A man whose vision extends to a shanty, might 
continue to build on your quicksands, to grab a fast profit and run. 
A man who envisions skyscrapers, will not. Nor will he give ten years 
of unswerving devotion to the task of inventing a new product, when 
he knows the gangs of entrenched mediocrity are juggling the laws 
against him, to tie him. restrict him and force him to fail, but should 
he fight them and struggle and succeed, they will sei/e his rewards 
and his invention. 

“Look past the range of the moment, you who cry that you fear 
to compete with men of superior intelligence, that their mind is a 
threat to your livelihood, that the strong leave no chance to the weak 
in a market of voluntary trade. What determines the material value 
of your work? Nothing but the productive effort of your mind— if 
you lived on a desert island. The less efficient the thinking of your 
brain, the less your physical labor would bring you - and you could 
spend your life on a single routine, collecting a precarious harvest 
or hunting with bow and arrows, unable to think any further. But 
when you live in a rational society, where men are free to trade, you 
receive an incalculable bonus: the material value of your work is 
determined not only by your effort, but by the effort of the best 
productive minds who exist in the world around you. 

“When you work in a modern factory, you are paid, not only for 
your labor, but for all the productive genius which has made that 
factory possible: for the work of the industrialist who built it. for the 
work of the investor who saved the money tb risk on the untried and 
the new, for the work of the engineer who <|esigned the machines of 
which you are pushing the levers, for the work of the inventor wjio 
created the product which you spend your jime on making, for the 
work of the scientist who discovered the laws that went into the 
making of that product, for the work of the? philosopher who taught 
men how to think and whom you spend yopr time denouncing. 

“The machine, the frozen form of a living intelligence, is the power 

974 



that expands the potential of your life by raising the productivity of 
your time. If you worked as a blacksmith in the mystics' Middle 
Ages, the whole of your earning capacity would consist of an iron 
bar produced by your hands in days and days of effort. How many 
tons of rail do you produce per day if you work for Hank Rearden? 
Would you dare to claim that the size of your pay check was created 
solely by your physical labor and that those rails were the product 
of your muscles? The standard of living of that blacksmith is ail that 
your muscles are worth: the rest is a gift from Hank Rearden. 

“Every man is free to rise as far as he’s able or willing, but it’s 
only the degree to which he thinks that determines the degree to 
which he’ll rise. Physical labor as such can extend no further than the 
range of the moment. The man who does no more than physical labor, 
consumes the material value-equivalent of his own contribution to the 
process of production, and leaves no further value, neither for himself 
nor others. But the man who produces an idea in any field of rational 
endeavor — the man who discovers new knowledge— is the permanent 
benefactor of humanity. Material products can’t be shared, they be- 
long to some ultimate consumer; it is only the value of an idea that 
can be shared with unlimited numbers ot men, making all sharers 
richer at no one's sacrifice or loss, raising the productive capacity of 
whatever labor they perform. It is the value of his own time that the 
strong of the intellect transfers to the weak, letting them work on the 
jobs he discovered, while devoting his time to further discoveries. TOs 
is mutual trade to mutual advantage: the interests of the mind are 
one, no matter what the degree of intelligence, among men who desire 
to work and don’t seek or expect the unearned. 

“In proportion to the mental energy he spent, the man who creates 
a new invention receive* but a small percentage of his value in terms 
of material payment, no matter what fortune he makes, no matter 
what millions he earns. But the man who works as a janitor in the 
factory producing that invention, receives an enormous payment in 
proportion to the mental effort that his job requires ot him . And the 
same is true of all men between, on all levels of ambition and ability. 

I he man at the top of the intellectual pyramid contributes the most 
to all those below him, but gets nothing except his material payment, 
receiving no intellectual bonus from others to add to the value of his 
time. The man at the bottom who, left to himself, would starve in his 
hopeless ineptitude, contributes nothing to those above him. but re- 
ceives the bonus of all of their brains. Such is the nature of the ‘com- 
petition’ between the strong and the weak of the intellect. Such is the 
pattern of ‘exploitation’ tor which you have damned the strong. 

“Such was the service we had given you and were glad and willing 
to give. What did we ask in return? Nothing but freedom. We re- 
quired that you leave us free to function — free to think and to work 
as we choose — free to take our own risks and to bear our own 
losses — free to earn our own profits and to make our own fortunes 
free to gamble on your rationality, to submit our products to your 
judgment for the purpose of a voluntary trade, to rely on the objec- 
tive value of our work and on your mind's ability to see it — free to 
count on your intelligence and honesty, and to deal with nothing but 

975 



your mind. Such was the price we asked, which you chose to reject 
as too high. You decided to call it unfair that we, who had dragged 
you out of your hovels and provided you with modern apartments, 
with radios, movies and cars, should own our palaces and yachts — 
you decided that you had a right to your wages, but we had no right 
to our profits, that you did not want us to deal with your mind, but 
to deal, instead, with your gun. Our answer to that , was: ‘May you 
be damned!' Our answer came true. You are. 

“You did not care to compete in terms of intelligence— you are 
now competing m terms of brutality. You did not care to allow re- 
wards to be won by successful production — you are now running a 
race in which rewards are won by successful plunder. You called it 
selfish and cruel that men should trade value for value— you have 
now established an unselfish society where they trade extortion for 
extortion. Your system is a legal civil war, where men gang up on 
one another and struggle for possession of the law, which they use 
as a club over rivals, till another gang wrests it from their clutch and 
clubs them with it in their turn, all of them clamoring protestations 
of service to an unnamed public s unspecified good. You had said 
that you saw no difference between economic and political power, 
between the power of money and the power of guns- -no difference 
between reward and punishment, no difference between purchase 
and plunder, no difference between pleasure and fear, no difference 
between life and death. You are learning the difference now. 

“Some of you might plead the excuse of your ignorance, of a 
limited mind and a limited range. But the damned and the guiltiest 
among you are the men who had the capacity to know, yet chose to 
blank out reality, the men who were willing to sell their intelligence 
into cynical servitude to force: the contemptible breed of those mys- 
tics of science who profess a devotion to some sort of ‘pure knowl- 
edge’ — the purity consisting of their claim that such knowledge has 
no practical purpose on this earth — who reserve their logic for inani- 
mate matter, but believe that the subject of dealing with men re- 
quires and deserves no rationality, who scorn money and sell their 
souls in exchange for a laboratory supplied by loot And since there 
is no such thing as ‘non-practical knowledge’ or any sort of ‘disinter- 
ested’ action, since they scorn the use of their science for the purpose 
and profit of life, they deliver their science to the service of death, 
to the only practical purpose it can ever have for looters: to inventing 
weapons of coercion and destruction. They, the intellects who seek 
escape from moral values, they are the damned on this earth, theirs 
is the guilt beyond forgiveness. Do you heajr me. Dr. Robert Stadler? 

“But it is not to him that I wish to speaje. 1 am speaking to those 
among you who have retained some sovereign shred of their soul, 
unsold and unstamped: ‘—to the order of ^thers.’ If. in the chaos of 
the motives that have made you listen to the radio tonight, there 
was an honest, rational desire to learn what is wrong with the world, 
you are the man whom I wished to addreifc. By the rules and terms’ 
of my code, one owes a rational statement to those whom it does 
concern and who’rc making an effort to know. 111056 who’re making 
an effort to fail to understand me, are not a concern of mine, 

976 



k *I am speaking to those who desire to live and to recapture the 
honor of their soul. Now that you know the truth about your world, 
stop supporting your own destroyers . The evil of the world is made 
possible by nothing but the sanction you give it. Withdraw your 
sanction. Withdraw your support. Do not try to live on your enemies’ 
terms or to win at a game where they're setting the rules. Do not 
seek the favor of those who enslaved you, do not beg for alms from 
those who have robbed you, be it subsidies, loans or jobs, do not 
join their team to recoup what they’ve taken by helping them rob 
your neighbors. One cannot hope to maintain one’s life by accepting 
bribes to condone one's destruction. Do not struggle for profit, suc- 
cess or security at the price of a lien on your right to exist. .Such a 
lien is not to be paid off; the more you pay them, the more they 
will demand; the greater the values you seek or achieve, the more 
vulnerably helpless you become. Theirs is a system of white blackmail 
devised to bleed you, not by means of your sms, but by means of 
your love for existence. 

“Do not attempt to rise on the looters’ terms or to climb a ladder 
while they’re holding the ropes. Do not allow their hands to touch 
the only power that keeps them in power: your living ambition. Go 
on strike— in the manner I did Use youi mind and skill in private, 
extend your knowledge, develop your ability, but do not share your 
achievements with others. Do not try to produce a fortune, with a 
Jooter riding on your back. Stay on the lowest rung of their ladder, 
earn no more than your barest survival, do not make an extra penny 
to support the looters’ state. Since you’re captive, act as a captive, 
do not help them pretend that you're free. Be the silent, incorrupt- 
ible enemy they dread. When they force you, obey — but do not vol- 
unteer. Never volunteer a step in their direction, or a wish, or a plea, 
or a purpose. Do not help a holdup man lo claim that he acts as 
your friend and benefactor. Do not help your jailers to pretend that 
their jail is your natural state ol existence. Do not help them to fake 
reality. That fake is the only dam holding off their secret terror, the 
terror of knowing they're unfit to exist: remove it and let them 
drown; your sanction is their only life belt. 

“H you find a chance to vanish into some wilderness out of their 
reach, do so, but not lo exist as a bandit or to create a gang compet- 
ing with their racket; build a productive life of youi own with those 
who accept your moral code and are willing lo struggle for a human 
existence. You have no chance to win on the Morality of Death or 
by the code of faith and force; raise a standard to which the honest 
will repair: the standard of Life and Reason. 

“Act as a rational being and aim at becoming a rallying point for 
all those who are starved for a voice of integrity — act on your ratio- 
nal values, whether alone in the midst of your enemies, or with a 
tew of your chosen friends, or as the tounder of a modest community 
on the frontier of mankind’s rebirth. 

“When the looters’ state collapses, deprived of the best of its slaves, 
when it falls to a level of impotent chaos, like the mystic-ridden na- 
tions of the Orient, and dissolves into starving robber gangs fighting 

977 



to fob one another — when the advocates of the morality of sacrifice 
perish with their final ideal-— then and on that day we will return, 

“We will open the gates of our city to those who deserve to enter, 
a city of smokestacks, pipe lines, orchards, markets and inviolate 
homes. We will act as the rallying center for such hidden outposts as 
you’ll build. With the sign of the dollar as our symbol — the sign of 
free trade and free minds — we will move to reclaim this country once 
more from the impotent savages who never discovered its nature, its 
meaning, its splendor. Those who choose to join us, will join us; those 
who don't, will not have the power to stop us; hordes of savages have 
never been an obstacle to men who carried the banner of the mind. 

“Then this country will once more become a sanctuary for a van- 
ishing species: the rational being. The political system we will build 
is contained in a single moral premise: no man may obtain any values 
from others by resorting to physical force. Every man will stand or 
fall, live or die by his rational judgment. If he fails to use it and 
falls, he will be his only victim. If he fears that his judgment is 
inadequate, he will not be given a gun to improve it. If he chooses 
to correct his errors in time, he will have the unobstructed example 
of his betters, for guidance in learning to think; but an end will be 
put to the infamy of paying with one life tor the errors of another. 

‘in that world, you'll be able to rise in the morning with the spirit 
you have known in your childhood: that spirit of eagerness, adven- 
ture and certainty which comes from dealing with a rational universe 
No child is afraid of nature; it is your fear of men that will vanish, 
the fear that has stunted your soul, the fear you acquired in your 
early encounters with the incomprehensible, the unpredictable, the 
contradictory, the arbitrary, the hidden, the faked, the irrational in 
men. You will live in a world of responsible beings, who will be as 
consistent and reliable as facts: the guarantee of their character will 
be a system of existence where objective reality is the standard and 
the judge. Your virtues will be given protection, your vices and weak- 
nesses will not. Every chance will be open to your good, none will 
be provided for your evil. What you’ll receive from men will not be 
alms, or pity, or mercy, or forgiveness of sins, but a single value: 
justice . And when you'll look at men or at yourself, you will feel, 
not disgust, suspicion and guilt, but a single constant: respect . 

“Such is the future you are capable of winning. It requires a strug- 
gle; so docs any human value. All life is a purposeful struggle, and 
your only choice is the choice of a goal. Do you wish to continue 
the battle of your present or do you wish to fight for my world? Do 
you wish to continue a struggle that consists of clinging to precarious 
ledges in a sliding descent to the abyss, ^ struggle where the hard- 
ships you endure are irreversible and the victories you win bring you 
closer to destruction? Or do you wish to [undertake a struggle that 
consists of rising from ledge to ledge in steady ascent to the lop, 
a struggle where the hardships are investments in your future, and 
the victories bring you irreversibly closer tb the world of your moral* 
ideal, and should you die without reaching full sunlight, you will die 
on a level touched by its rays? Such is the choice before you. Let 
your mind and your love of existence decide. 

978 



“The last of my words will be addressed to those heroes who 
might still be hidden in the world, those who are held prisoner, not 
by their evasions, but by their virtues and their desperate courage. 
My brothers in spirit, check on your virtues and on the nature of 
the enemies you’re serving. Your destroyers hold you by means of 
your endurance, your generosity, your innocence, your love— the en- 
durance that carries their burdens— the generosity that responds to 
their cries of despair— the innocence that is unable to conceive of 
their evil and gives them the benefit of every doubt, refusing to 
condemn them without understanding and incapable of understand- 
ing such motives as theirs — the love, your love of life, which makes 
you believe that they are men and that they love it, too. But the 
world of today is the world they wanted; hie is the object of their 
haired. Leave them to the death they worship. In the name of your 
magnificent devotion to this earth, leave them, don’t exhaust the 
greatness of your soul on achieving the triumph of the evil ot theirs. 
Do you hear me ... my love? 

“In the name of the best within you, do not sacrifice this world 
to those who are Us worst. In the name ot the values that keep you 
alive, do not let your vision of man be distorted by the ugly, the 
cowardly, the mindless in those who have never achieved his title. 
Do not lose your knowledge that man’s proper estate is an upright 
posture, an intransigent mind and a step that travels unlimited roads. 
Do not let your lire go out. spark by ii replaceable spark, in the 
hopeless swamps of the approximate, the not -quite, the not-yet. the 
not-al-all. Do not let the hero in your soul perish, in lonely frustra- 
tion for the life you deserved, but have never been able to reach. 
Check your road and the nature of sour battle. The world you de- 
sired can be won. it exists, it is real, it is possible, it’s yours. 

“But to win it requires your total dedication and a total break with 
the world of your past, with the doctrine that man is a sacriticial 
animal who exists for the pleasure ot others Fight for the value of 
your person. Fight for the virtue of vour pride Fight for the essence 
of that which is man; for his sovereign rational mind. Fight with the 
radiant certainty and the absolute rectitude of knowing that yours is 
the Morality of Life and that yours is the battle for any achievement, 
any value, any grandeur, any goodness, any joy that has ever existed 
on this earth 

“You will win when you are ready to pronounce the oath I have 
taken at the start of my battle — and for those who wish to know the 
day of my return, I shall now repeat it to the hearing of the world: 

“1 swear— -by my life and my love of it — that I will never live tor 
the sake ot another man, nor ask another man to live for mine. ’ 


Chapter VIII THE EGOIST 

“It wasn't real, was it?” said Mr. Thompson. 

They stood in front of the radio, as the last sound ot Galt s voice 
had left them. No one had moved through the span of silence; they 
had stood, looking at the radio, as if waiting. But the radio was now 

W 



only a wooden box with some knobs and a circle of cloth stretched 
over an empty loud-speaker. 

“We seem to have heard it,” said Tinky Holloway. 

“We couldn’t help it,” said Chick Morrison. 

Mr. Thompson was sitting on a crate. The pale, oblong smear at 
the level of his elbow was the face of Wesley Mouch, who was seated 
on the floor. Far behind them, like an island in the vast semidarknoss 
of the studio space, the drawing room prepared for their broadcast 
stood deserted and fully lighted, a semicircle of empty armchairs 
under a cobweb of dead microphones in the glare of the floodlights 
which no one had taken the initiative to turn off. 

Mr. Thompson’s eyes were darting over the faces around him, as 
if in search of some special vibrations known only to him. The rest 
of them were trying to do it surreptitiously, each attempting to catch 
a glimpse of the others without letting them catch his own glance. 

“Let me out of here!” screamed a young third-rate assistant, sud- 
denly and to no one in particular. 

“Stay put!” snapped Mr. Thompson. 

The sound of his own order and the hiccough-moan of the figure 
immobilized somewhere in the darkness, seemed to help him recap- 
ture a familiar version of reality. His head emerged an inch higher 
from his shoulders. 

“Who permitted it to hap — ” he began in a rising voice, but 
stopped; the vibrations he caught were the dangerous panic of the 
cornered. “What do you make oi it?” he asked, instead. There was 
no answer. “Well?” He waited. “Well, say something, somebody!” 

“We don’t have to believe it, do we?” cried James Taggart, thrust- 
ing his face toward Mr. Thompson, in a manner that was almost a 
threat. “Do we?” Taggart’s face was distorted; hts features seemed 
shapeless; a mustache of small beads sparkled between his nose 
and mouth. 

“Pipe down,” said Mr. Thompson uncertainly, drawing a little 
away from him. 

“Wc don’t have to believe it!” Taggart's voice had the flat, insis- 
tent sound of an effort to maintain a trance. “Nobody's ever said it 
before! It’s just one man! We don’t have to believe it!” 

“Take it easy,” said Mr. Thompson. 

“Why is he so sure he's right? Who is he to go against the whole 
world, against everything ever said for centuries and centuries? Who 
is he to know? Nobody can be sure! Nobody can know what’s right! 
There isn’t any right’” 

“Shut up!” yelled Mr. Thompson. “What are you trying to — ” 

The blast that stopped him was a military march leaping suddenly 
forth from the radio receiver — the military march interrupted three 
hours ago, played by the familiar screeches of a studio record. It 
took them a few stunned seconds to graip it, while the cheerful, 
thumping chords went goose-stepping through the silence, sounding 
grotesquely irrelevant, like the mirth of a half-wit. The station’s pro- 
gram director was blindly obeying the absolute that no radio time 
was ever to be left blank. 


980 



“Tell them to cut it oft!” screamed Wesley Mouch, leaping to his 
feet. “It will make the public think that we authorized that speech!” 

“You damn fooP” cried Mr. Thompson. “Would you rather have 
the public think that we didn’t?” 

Mouch stopped short and his eyes shot to Mr. Thompson with the 
appreciative glance of an amateur at a master. 

“Broadcasts as usual!” ordered Mr. Thompson. “Tell them to go 
on with whatever programs they'd scheduled for this hour! No spe- 
cial announcements, no explanations’ Tell them to go on as if noth- 
ing had happened!” 

Half a dozen of Chick Morrison’s morale conditioners went scurry- 
ing off toward telephones. 

“Muzzle the commentators! Don’t allow them to comment! Send 
word to every station in the country! Let the public wonder! Don’t 
let them think that we’re worried! Don’t let them think that it’s 
important!” 

“No!” screamed Eugene Lawson, “No, no. no’ We can’t give peo- 
ple the impression that we’ie endorsing that speech! It's horrible, 
horrible, horrible!’’ Lawson was not in tears, but his voice had the 
undignified sound of an adult sobbing with helpless rage. 

“Who’s said anything about endorsing it?" snapped Mr. Thompson. 

“It’s horrible! It’s immoral! It’s selfish, heartless, ruthless! It's the 
most vicious speech ever made’ It . it will make people demand 
to be happy!” 

“It's only a speech,” said Mr Thompson, not too firmly. 

“It seems to me,” said Chick Morrison, his voice tentatively help- 
ful. “that people of nobler spiritual nature, you know what I mean, 
people of . . of . . . well, of mystical insight" — he paused, as if 
waiting to be slapped, but no one moved, so he repeated firmly— 
“yes, of mystical insight, won’t go for that speech Logic isn’t every- 
thing, after all.” 

“The workingmen won’t go for it,” said Tinkv Holloway, a bit 
more helpfully. “He didn’t sound like a friend ot labor,” 

“The women of the country won’t go for it.” declared Ma Chal- 
mers. “It is, 1 believe, an established fact that women don’t go for 
that stuff about the mind. Women have finer feelings. You can count 
on the women.” 

“You can count on the scientists,” said Dr. Simon Pritchett. They 
were all pressing forward, suddenly eager to speak, as if they had 
found a subject they could handle with assurance. “Scientists know 
better than to believe in reason. He's no friend of the scientists.” 

”He\ no friend of anybody," said Wesley Mouch, recapturing a 
shade of confidence at the sudden realization, “except maybe of 
big business,” 

“No!” cried Mr. Mowen in terror. ”No! Don't accuse us! Don’t 
say it! I won't have you say it!” 

“What?” 

“That . . . that . , . that anybody is a friend of business!” 

“Don’t let’s make a fuss about that speech.” said Dr. Floyd Ferris, 

981 



“It was too intellectual. Much too intellectual for the common man. 
It will have no effect. People are too dumb to understand it.” 

“Yeah,” said Mouch hopefully, “that’s so." 

“In the first place,” said Dr. Ferris, encouraged, “people can’t 
think. In the second place, they don't want to.” 

“In the third place,” said Fred Kinnan, “they don't want to starve. 
And what do you propose to do about that?” 

It was as if he had pronounced the question which all ol the pre- 
ceding utterances had been intended to stave off. No one answered 
him, but heads drew faintly deeper into shoulders, and figures drew 
faintly closer to one another, like a small cluster under the weight 
of the studio's empty space. The military march boomed through the 
silence with the inflexible gaiety of a grinning skull. 

“Turn it off!” yelled Mr. Thompson, waving at the radio “1 urn 
that damn thing off!” , 

Someone obeyed him. But the sudden silence was worse. 

“Well?" said Mr. Thompson at last, raising his eyes reluctantly to 
Fred Kinnan “What do you think we ought to do 9 ” 

“Who. me?” chuckled Kinnan “I don't run this show.” 

Mr. Thompson slammed his fist down on his knee, “Say some- 
thing--” he ordered, but seeing Kinnan turn away, added, “some- 
body!” There were no volunteers. “What are we to do 9 " he yelled, 
knowing that the man who answered would, thereafter, be the man 
in power. “What are we to do 9 Can't somebody tell us what to do 9 ” 

“I can!" 

It w r as a woman’s voice, but it had the quality of the voice the\ 
had heard on the radio. They whirled to Dagny before she had time 
to step forward from the darkness beyond the group. As she stepped 
forward, her face frightened them- because it was devoid of tear. 

“I can," she said, addressing Mr. Thompson “You’re to give up." 

“Give up?” he repeated blankly. 

“You’re through. Don't you see that you’re through? What else 
do you need, after what you’ve heard 9 Give up and get out of the 
way. Leave men free to exist ” He was looking at her, neither ob- 
jecting nor moving. “You’re still alive, you’re using a human lan- 
guage, you're asking for answers, you’re counting on reason — you’re 
still counting on reason, God damn you! You're able to understand. 
It isn't possible that you haven't understood. There’s nothing you 
can now pretend to hope, to want or gain or grab or reach. There's 
nothing but destruction ahead, the world’s and your own. Give up 
and get out.” 

They were listening intently, but as if they did not hear her words, 
as if they were clinging blindly to a qua$ty she was alone among 
them to possess: the quality of being aliye, There was a sound of 
exultant laughter under the angry violence^*! her voice, her face was 
lifted, her eyes seemed to be greeting some spectacle at an incalcula- 
ble distance, so that the glowing patch on fier forehead did not look 
like the reflection of a studio spotlight, blit of a sunrise. 

“You wish to live, don’t you? Get out of the way, if you want a 
chance. Let those who can, take over. He knows what to do. You 
don’t. He is able to create the means of human survival. You aren’t.” 

982 



“Don’t listen to her!” 

It was so savage a cry of hatred that they drew away from Dr. 
Robert Stadler, as if he had given voice to the unconfessed within 
them. His face looked as they feared theirs would look in the privacy 
of darkness. r 

“Don’t listen to her!” he cried, his eyes avoiding hers, while hers 
paused on him for a brief, level glance that began as a shock of 
astonishment and ended as an obituary. “It’s your life or his!” 

“Keep quiet, Professor,” said Mr. Thompson, brushing him off 
with the jerk of one hand. Mr. Thompson’s eyes were watching 
Dagny, as if some thought were struggling to take shape inside his 
skull. 

“You know the truth, all of you,” she said, “and so do I, and so 
does every man who’s heard John Galt! What else are you waiting 
for? For proof? He’s given it to you. For tacts? They’re all around 
you. How many corpses do you intend to pile up before you re- 
nounce it— your guns, your power, your controls and the whole ot 
your miserable altruistic creed? Give it up, if you want to live. Give 
it up. if there's anything left in your mind that’s still able to want 
human beings to remain alive on this earth’” 

‘But it’s treason!” cried Eugene 1 awson. “She’s talking pure 
treason!” 

“Now, now,” said Mr. Thompson. “You don’t have to go to 
extremes ” 

“Huh?” asked Tinky Holloway 

“But . . . but surely it's outrageous?” asked Chick Morrison. 

“You’re not agreeing with her. are you 0 ” asked Wesley Mouch. 

“Who’s said anything about agreeing?” said Mr. Thompson, his 
tone surprisingly placid. “Don’t be premature. Just don’t you be 
prematuie, any of you. There's no harm in listening to any argument, 
is there?” 

“That kind of argument 0 ” asked Wesley Mouch. his finger stab- 
bing again and again in Dagny's direction. 

“Any kind,” said Mr. Thompson placidly. “We mustn't be 
intolerant,” 

‘But it’s treason, ruin, disloyalty, selfishness and big-business 
propaganda!” 

“Oh, I don’t know,” said Mr. Thompson. “We've got to keep an 
open mind. We've got to give consideration to every one’s viewpoint. 
She might have something there. He knows what to do We’ve got 
to be flexible.” 

“Do you mean that you're willing to quit?” gasped Mouch. 

“Now don't jump to conclusions,” snapped Mr. Thompson angrily. 
“If there's one thing 1 can't stand, it’s people who jump to conclu- 
sions. And another thing is ivory-tower intellectuals who stick to 
some pet theory and haven’t any sense of piactical reality. At a lime 
hke this, we’ve got to be flexible above all.” 

He saw a look of bewilderment on all the faces around him, on 
Dagny’s and on the others, though not for the same reasons. He 
smiled, rose to his feet and turned to Dagny. 

“Thank you. Miss T aggart,” he said. “Thank you for speaking 

983 



your mind That’s what I want you to know — that you can*trust me 
and speak to me with full frankness. We’re not your enemies. Miss 
Taggart. Don’t pay any attention to the boys — they’re upset, but 
they’ll come dowm to earth. We’re not your enemies, nor the coun- 
try’s. Sure, we’ve made mistakes, we’re only human, but we’re trying 
to do our best for the people — that is, l mean, for everybody — 
in these difficult times. We can’t make snap judgments and reach 
momentous decisions on the spur of the moment, can we? We’ve 
got to consider it, and mull it over, and weigh it carefully. I just 
want you to remember that we re not anybody's enemies — you real- 
ize that, don’t you?” 

‘Tve said everything 1 had to say,” she answered, turning away 
from him, with no clue to the meaning of his words and no strength 
to attempt to find it. 

She turned to Eddie Willers, who had watched the men around 
them with a look of so great an indignation that he seemed para- 
lyzed — as if his brain were crying, “It’s evil!” and could not move 
to any further thought. She jerked her head, indicating the door; he 
followed her obediently. 

Dr. Robert Stadler waited until the door had closed after them, 
then whirled on Mr. Thompson. “You bloody fool! Do you know 
what you’re playing with? Don’t you understand that it’s life or 
death? That it’s you or him?” 

The thin tremor that ran along Mr. Thompson's lips was a smile 
of contempt. “It's a funny way for a professor to behave. 1 didn’t 
think professors ever went to pieces.” 

“Don’t you understand? Don't you see that it’s one or the other?” 

‘‘And what is it that you want me to do?” 

• “You must kill him.” 

It was the fact that Dr. Stadler had not cried it. but had said it in 
a flat, cold, suddenly and fully conscious voice, that brought a chill 
moment of silence as the whole room’s answer. 

“You must find him,” said Dr. Stadler, his voice cracking and 
rising once more. “You must leave no stone unturned till you find 
him and destroy him! If he lives, he ll destroy all of us! If he lives, 
we can’t!” 

“How am I to find him?” asked Mr. Thompson, speaking slowly 
and carefully. 

“I ... I can tell you. 1 can give you a lead. Watch that Taggart 
woman. Set your men to watch every move she makes. She’ll lead 
you to him, sooner or later.” 

“How do you know that?” 

‘isn’t it obvious? Isn't it sheer chance that she hasn’t deserted 
you long ago? Don't you have the wits to see that she’s one of his 
kind?” He did not state what kind. ; 

“Yeah,” said Mr. Thompson thoughtfully, ^‘yeah, that’s true.” He 
jerked his head up with a smile of satLsfactiob. “The professor’s gbt 
something there. Put a tail on Miss Taggart/’ he ordered, snapping 
his fingers at Mouch. “Have her tailed day 4nd night. We've got to 
find him.” 

“Yes, sir,” said Mouch blankly. 

984 



‘‘And when you find him/’ Dr. Stadler asked tensely, “you’ll kill 
him?” 

“Kill him, you damn fool? We need him!” cried Mr. Thompson. 

Mouch waited, but no one ventured the question that was on ev- 
eryone’s mind, so he made the effort to utter stiffly, “1 don’t under- 
stand you, Mr. Thompson.” 

“Oh, you theoretical intellectuals!” said Mr. Thompson with exas- 
peration. “What are you all gaping at? It’s simple. Whoever he is, 
he’s a man of action. Besides, he’s got a pressure group: he’s cor- 
nered all the men of brains. He knows what to do. We’ll find him 
and he’ll tell us. He’ll tell us what to do. He’ll make things work. 
He'll pull us out ol the hide.” 

"Us, Mr. Thompson?” 

“Sure. Never mind your theories. We’ll make a deal with him.” 

“With hiniT ’ 

“Sure. Oh, we’ll have to compromise, we'll have to make a few 
concessions to big business, and the welfare boys won’t like it, but 
what the hell! — do you know any other way out?” 

“But his ideas?” 

“Mr. Thompson,” said Mouch, choking. “I . . . I’m afraid he's a 
man who’s not open to a deal.” 

“There’s no such thing,” said Mr. Thompson. 

A it 

A cold wind rattled the broken signs over the windows ot aban- 
doned shops, m the street outside the radio station. The city seemed 
abnormally quiet. The distant rumble ol the traffic sounded lower 
than usual and made the wind sound louder. Empty sidewalks 
stretched otf into the darkness: a few lone figures stood in whispering 
clusters under the rare lights. 

Eddie Willcrs did not speak until they were many blocks away 
from the station. He stopped abruptly, when they reached a deserted 
square where the public loud-speakers, which no one had thought 
of turning off, were now broadcasting a domestic comedy — the shrill 
voices of a husband and wife quarreling over Junior’s dates — to an 
empty stretch of pavement enclosed by unlighted house fronts. Be- 
yond the square, a few dots of light, scattered vertically above the 
twenty-fifth-floor limit of the city, suggested a distant, rising form, 
which was the Taggart Building. 

Eddie stopped and pointed at the building, his finger shaking. 
“Dagny!” he cried, then lowered his voice involuntarily. “Dagny,” 
he whispered. “I know him. He ... he works there . . . there ...” 
He kept pointing at the building with incredulous helplessness. “He 
works for Taggart Transcontinental ...” 

“I know,” she answered; her voice was a lifeless monotone. 

“As a track laborer ... as the lowest of track laborers . . 

“I know.” 

“I’ve talked to him . . I've been talking to him for years ... in 
the Terminal cafeteria . . . He used to ask questions ... all sorts of 
questions about the railroad, and I — God, Dagny! was I protecting 
the railroad or was I helping to destroy it?” 

“Both. Neither. It doesn’t matter now.” 

985 



“I could have staked my life that he loved the railroad!” 

“He does.” 

“But he destroyed it.” 

“Yes.” 

She tightened, the collar of her coat and walked on, against a gust 
of wind. 

“I used to talk to him,” he said, after a while. “His face . . 
Dagny, it didn’t look like any of the others, it ... it showed that he 
understood so much. ... I was glad, whenever 1 saw him there, in 
the cafeteria ... I just talked ... I don’t think l knew that he was 
asking questions . . . but he was ... so many questions about the 
railroad and . . . and about you.” 

“Did he ever ask you what I look like, when I’m asleep?” 

“Yes . . . Yes, he did ... I d found you once, asleep in the office, 
and when I mentioned it, he — ” He slopped, as a sudden connection 
crashed into place in his mind. 

She turned to him, in the ray of a street lamp, raising and holding 
her face in lull light for a silent, deliberate moment, as if in answer 
and confirmation of his thought. 

He closed his eyes “Oh God, Dagny!” he whispered. 

They walked on in silence. 

“He’s gone by now, isn’t he?” he asked. “From the Taggart Termi- 
nal, I mean.” 

“Eddie,” she said, her voice suddenly grim, “if you value his life, 
don’t ever ask that question. You don’t want them to lind him, do 
you? Don’t give them any leads. Don't ever breathe a word to any- 
one about having known him. Don't try to find out whether he’s still 
working in the Terminal.” 

“You don’t mean that he’s still there?” 

“I don't know, i know only that he might be.” 

"Now?" 

“Yes.” 

“Still?” 

“Yes. Keep quiet about it, it you don't want to destroy him.” 

“I think he's gone He won’t be back. I haven’t seen him since . . 
since ...” 

“Since when?” she asked sharply. 

“The end of May. The night when you left for Utah, remember?” 
He paused, as the memory of that night’s encounter and the full 
understanding of its meaning struck him together. He said with ef- 
fort, “1 saw him that night. Not since . . . I’ve waited tor him, in the 
cafeteria ... He never came back.” 

“I don’t think he’ll let you see him no^, he'll keep out of youi 
way. But don’t look for him. Don’t inquir^.” 

“It’s funny. I don’t even know what nan|e he used. It was Johnny 
something or — ” 

“It was John Galt,” she said, with affaint, mirthless chuckle. 
“Don’t look at the Terminal payroll. The jhame is still there.” 

“Just like that? All these years?” 

“For twelve years. Just like that.” 

“And it’s still there now?” 


986 



“Yes.” 

After a moment, he said, “It proves nothing, I know. The person- 
nel office hasn’t taken a single name off the payroll list since Direc- 
tive 10-289. If a man quits, they give his name and job to a starving 
friend of their own, rather than report it to the Unification Board.” 

“Don’t question the personnel office or anyone. Don’t call atten- 
tion to his name. If you or I make any inquiries about him, somebody 
might begin to wonder. Don't look for him. Don’t make any move 
in his direction. And if you ever catch sight of him by chance, act 
as if you didn’t know him.’’ 

He nodded. After a while, he said, his voice tense and low, “1 
wouldn’t turn him over to them, not even to save the railroad.” 

“Eddie — ” 

“Yes?” 

“If you ever catch sight of him, tell me.” 

He nodded. 

Two blocks later, he asked quietly. “You’re going to quit, one of 
these days, and vanish, aren’t you?” 

“Why do you say that?” It was almost a cry. 

“Aren’t you?” 

She did not answer at once, when she did. the sound of despair 
was present in her voice only in the form ot too tight a monotone: 
“Eddie, if I quit, what would happen to the Taggart trains?” 

“There would be no Taggart trains within a w'eek. Maybe less.” 

“There will be no looters' government within ten days. Then men 
like Cuffy Meigs will devour the last of our t ails and engines. Should 
1 lose the battle by failing to wail one more moment? How can I 
let it go — Taggart Transcontinental. Eddie- go turever, when one 
last effort can still keep it in existence? If I've stood things this long, 

1 can stand them a little longer. Just a little longer. I'm not helping 
the looters. Nothing can help them now.” 

“What are they going to do?” 

“I don't know. What can they do? They ’to finished.” 

“1 suppose so.” 

“Didn’t you see them? They're miseiable. panic-stricken rats, run- 
ning for their lives.” 

“Does it mean anything to them?” 

“What?” 

“'Their lives,” 

“They’re still struggling, aren’t they? But they're through and they 
know it.” 

“Have they ever acted on what they know?” 

“They’ll have to. They’ll give up. It won’t be long. And we’ll be 
here to save whatever’s left.” 

“Mr. Thompson wishes it to be known,” said official broadcasts 
on the morning of November 23, “that there is no cause for alarm. 
He urges the public not to draw any hasty conclusions. We must 
preserve our discipline, our morale, our unity and our sense of broad- 
minded tolerance. The unconventional speech, which some of you 
might have heard on the radio last night, was a thought -provoking 

987 



contribution to our pool of ideas on world problems. W,e must con- 
sider it soberly, avoiding the extremes of total condemnation or of 
reckless agreement. We must regard it as one viewpoint out of many 
in our democratic forum of public opinion, which, as last night has 
proved, is open to all. The truth, says Mr. Thompson, has many 
facets. We must remain impartial.” 

“They’re silent,” wrote Chick Morrison, as a summary of its con 
tent, across the report from one of the field agents he had sent out 
on a mission entitled Public Pulse Taking. “They’re silent,” he wrote 
across the next report, then across another and another. “Silence,” 
he wrote, with a frown of uneasiness, summing up his report to Mr. 
Thompson. “People seem to be silent.” 

The flames that went up to the sky of a winter night and devoured 
a home in Wyoming were not seen by the people of Kansas, who 
watched a trembling red glow on the prairie horizon, made by the 
flames that went up to devour a farm, and the glow was not reflected 
by the windows of a street in Pennsylvania, where the twisting red 
tongues were reflections of the flames that went up to devour a 
factory. Nobody mentioned, next morning, that those flames had not 
been set off by chance and that the owners ot the three places had 
vanished. Neighbors observed it without comment — and without as- 
tonishment. A few homes were found abandoned in random corners 
across the nation, some left locked, shuttered and empty, others open 
and gutted of all movable goods — but people watched it in silence 
and, through the snowdrifts of untended streets in the haze ot pre- 
morning darkness, went on trudging to their jobs, a little slowei 
than usual. 

Then, on November 27, a speaker at a political meeting in Cleve 
land was beaten up and had to escape by scurrying down dark alleys. 
His silent audience had come to sudden life when he had shouted 
that the cause of all their troubles was their selfish concern with 
their own troubles. 

On the morning of November 29. the workers of a shoe factory 
in Massachusetts were astonished, on entering their workshop, to 
find that the foreman was late. But they went to their usual posts 
and went on with their habitual routine, pulling levers, pressing but- 
tons, feeding leather into automatic cutters, piling boxes on a moving 
belt, wondering, as the hours went by, why they did not catch sight 
of the foreman, or the superintendent, or the general manager, or 
the company president. It was noon before they discovered that the 
front offices of the plant were empty. 

“You goddamn cannibals!” screamed a woman in the midst of a 
crowded movie theater, breaking into sudden, hysterical sobs — and 
the audience showed no sign of astonishntent, as if she were scream- 
ing for them all. 

“There is no cause for alarm,” said official broadcasts on Decem- 
ber 5. “Mr. Thompson wishes it to be l^riown that he is willing to 
negotiate with John Gait for the purpose 0f devising ways and means 
to achieve a speedy solution of our problems. Mr. Thompson urges 
the people to be patient. We must not worry, we must not doubt, 
we must not lose heart,” 


988 



The attendants of a hospital in Illinois showed no astonishment 
when a man was brought in, beaten up by his elder brother, who 
had supported him all his life: the younger man had screamed at the 
elder, accusing him of selfishness and greed— just as the attendants 
of a hospital in New York City showed no astonishment at the case 
of a woman who came in with a fractured jaw: she had been slapped 
in the face by a total stranger, who had heard her ordering her five- 
year-old son to give his best toy to the children of neighbors. 

Chick Morrison attempted a whistle-stop tour to buttress the coun- 
try’s morale by speeches on self-sacrifice for the general welfare. He 
was stoned at the first of his stops and had to return to Washington. 

Nobody had ever granted them the title of “the better men” or, 
granting it, had paused to grasp that title’s meaning, but everybody 
knew, each in his own community, neighborhood, office or shop and 
in his own unidentified terms, who would be the men that would 
now fail to appear at their posts on some coming morning and would 
silently vanish in search of unknown frontiers — the men whose faces 
were tighter than the faces around them, whose eyes were more 
direct, whose energy was more conscientiously enduring — the men 
who were now slipping away, one by one, from every comer of the 
country— -of the country' which was now like the descendant of what 
had once been regal glory, prostrated by the scourge of hemophilia, 
losing the best of its blood lrom a wound not to be healed 

“But we’re willing to negotiate!” yelled Mr Thompson to his assis- 
tants, ordering the special announcement to be repeated by all radio 
stations three times a day “We’re willing to negotiate! Hell hear 
it 1 He’ll answer!” 

Special listeners were ordered to keep watch, uav and night, at 
radio receivers tuned to every known frequency of sound, waiting 
tor an answer from an unknown transmitter. There was no answer. 

Umpty, hopeless, unfocused faces were becoming more apparent 
m the streets of the cities, but no one could read their meaning. As 
some men were escaping with their bodies into the underground of 
uninhabited regions, so others could only save their souls and were 
escaping into the underground of their minds — and no power on 
earth could tell whether their blankly indilferent eyes were shutters 
protecting hidden treasures at the bottom of shafts no longer to be 
mined, or were merely gaping holes of the parasite’s emptiness never 
to be filled. 

“I don’t know what to do,” said the assistant superintendent of 
an oil refinery, refusing to accept the job of the superintendent who 
had vanished — and the agents of the Unification Board were unable 
to tell whether he lied or not. It was only an edge of precision m 
the tone of his voice, an absence ot apology or shame, that made 
them wonder whether he was a rebel or a fool. It was dangerous to 
force the job on either. 

“Give us men!” The plea began to hammer progressively louder 
upon the desk of the Unification Board, from all parts of a country 
ravaged by unemployment, and neither the pleaders nor the Board 
dared to add the dangerous words which the cry was implying: ‘‘Give 
us men of ability!” There were waiting lines years* long for the jobs 

989 



of janitors, greasers, porters and bus boys; there was no one to apply 
for the jobs of executives, managers, superintendents, engineers. 

The explosions of oil refineries, the crashes of defective airplanes, 
the break-outs of blast furnaces, the wrecks of colliding trains, and the 
rumors of drunken orgies in the offices of newly created executives, 
made the members of the Board fear the kind of men who did apply 
for the positions of responsibility. 

“Don’t despair! Don’t give up!” said official broadcasts on Decem- 
ber 15, and on every day thereafter. “We will reach an agreement 
with John Galt. We will get him to lead us. He will solve all our 
problems. He will make things work. Don’t give up! We will get 
John Galt!” 

Rewards and honors were offered to applicants for managerial 
jobs — then to foremen — then to skilled mechanics — then to any man 
who would make an effort to deserve a promotion in rank: wage 
raises, bonuses, tax exemptions and a medal devised by Wesley 
Mouch, to be known as “The Order of Public Benefactors.” it 
brought no results. Ragged people listened to the offers of material 
comforts and turned away with lethargic indifference, as if they had 
lost the concept of “Value.” These , thought the public-pulse-takers 
with terror, were men who did not care to live — or men who did 
not care to live on present terms. 

“Don’t despair! Don’t give up! John Galt will solve our prob- 
lems!” said the radio voices of official broadcasts, traveling through 
the silence of falling snow into the silence of unheated homes. 

“Don’t tell them that wc haven’t got him!” cried Mr. Thompson 
to his assistants. “But for God's sake tell them to find him!” Squads 
of Chick Morrison’s boys were assigned to the task of manufacturing 
rumors: half of them went spreading the story that John Galt was 
in Washington and in conference with government officials -while 
the other half went spreading the story that the government would 
give five hundred thousand dollars as reward for information that 
would help to find John Galt. 

“No, not a clue,” said Wesley Mouch to Mr. Thompson, summing 
up the reports of the special agents who had been sent to check on 
every man by the name of John Gall throughout the country. 
“They’re a shabby lot. There’s a John Galt who’s a professor of 
ornithology, eighty years old— -there’s a retired greengrocer with a 
wife and nine children — there’s an unskilled railroad laborer who’s 
held the same job for twelve years — and other such trash.” 

“Don’t despair! We will get John Galt!” said official broadcasts 
in the daytime — but at night, every hour on the hour, by a secret, 
official order, an appeal was sent Irom $hort-wavc transmitters into 
the empty reaches of space: “Calling John Galt! . . . Calling John 
Galt! . . . Are you listening, John Galt*? . . . We wish to negotiate 
We wish to confer with you, Give us firord on where you can be 
reached. ... Do you hear us, John Galt?” There was no answer. 

The wads of worthless paper money ^ere growing heavier in the 
pockets of the nation, but there was less and less for that money 10 
buy. In September, a bushel of wheat had cost eleven dollars; it had 
cost thirty dollars in November; it had cost one hundred in Decenv 

990 



her; it was now approaching the price of two hundred— while the 
printing presses of the government treasury were running a race with 
starvation, and losing. 

When the workers of a factory beat up their foreman and wrecked 
the machinery in a fit of despair — no action could be taken against 
them. Arrests were futile, the jails were full, the arresting officers 
winked at their prisoners and let them escape on their way to 
prison — men were going through the motions prescribed for the mo- 
ment, with no thought of the moment to follow. No action could be 
taken when mobs of starving people attacked warehouses on the 
outskirts of cities. No action could be taken when punitive squadrons 
joined the people they had been sent to punish. 

“Are you listening, John Gall? ... We wish to negotiate. We 
might meet your terms . . . Are you listening 7 *’ 

There were whispered rumors of covered wagons traveling by 
night through abandoned trails, and of secret settlements armed to 
resist the attacks of those whom they called the “Indians” — the at- 
tacks of any looting savages, be they homeless mobs or government 
agents. Lights were seen, once in a while, on the distant horizon of 
a prairie, in the hills, on the ledges of mountains, vvheie no buildings 
had been known to exist But no soldiers could be persuaded to 
investigate the sources of those lights. 

On the doors of abandoned houses, on the gates of crumbling 
factories, on the walls of government buddings, there-appeared, once 
in a while, traced in chalk, in paint, in blood, the curving mark which 
was the sign ot the dollar. 

“Can you hear us, John Gall? . . Send us word. Name your 
terms. We will meet any terms >ou set. Can you hear us?” 

There was no answer. 

The shaft of red smoke that shot to the sky on the night of January 
22 and stood abnormally still for a while, like a solemn memorial 
obelisk, then wavered and swept back and forth across the sky, like 
a searchlight sending some undecipherable message, then went out 
as abruptly as it had come, marked the end of Reardon Steel — but 
the inhabitants of the area did not know' it. t hey learned it only on 
subsequent nights, when they— who had cursed the mills for the 
smoke, the fumes, the soot and the noise — looked out and, instead 
of the glow pulsating with life on their familiar horizon, they saw a 
black void. 

The mills had been nationalized, as the property of a deserter. 
The first bearer of the title of ‘People's Manager,” appointed to run 
the mills, had been a man of the Orien Boyle faction, a pudgy 
hanger-on of the metallurgical industry, who had wanted nothing but 
to follow his employees while going through the motions of leading. 
But at the end of a month, after too many clashes with the workers, 
too many occasions when his only answer had been that he couldn’t 
help it, too many undelivered orders, too many telephonic pressures 
from his buddies, he had begged to be transferred to some other 
position. The Orren Boyle faction had been tailing apaif, since Mr. 
Boyle had been confined to a rest home, where his doctor had forbid- 
den him any contact with business and had put him to the job of 

991 



weaving baskets, as a means of occupational therapy.. The second 
-‘People’s Manager” sent to Rearden Steel had belonged to the fac- 
tion of Cuffy Meigs. He had worn leather leggings and perfumed 
hair lotions, he had come to work with a gun on his hip, he had 
kept snapping that discipline was his primary goal and that by God 
he’d get it or else. The only discernible rule of the discipline had 
been his order forbidding all questions. After weeks of frantic activ- 
ity on the part of insurance companies, of firemen, of ambulances 
and of first-aid units, attending to a series of inexplicable accidents — 
the “People’s Manager” had vanished one morning, having sold and 
shipped to sundry racketeers of Europe and Latin America most of 
the cranes, the automatic conveyors, the supplies of refractory brick, 
the emergency power generator, and the carpet from what had once 
been Rearden’s office. 

No one had been able to untangle the issues in the violent chaos 
of the next few days — the issues had never been named, the sides 
had remained unacknowledged, but everyone had known that the 
bloody encounters between the older woikers and the newer had 
not been driven to such ferocious intensity by the trivial causes that 
kept setting them off — neither guards nor policemen nor state troop- 
ers had been able to keep order for the length of a day — nor could 
any faction muster a candidate willing to accept the post of “People's 
Manager.” On January 22, the operations of Rearden Steel had been 
ordered temporarily suspended. 

The shaft of red smoke, that night, had been caused by a sixty- 
year-old worker, who had set fire to one of the structures and had 
been caught in the act, laughing dazedly and staring at the flames. 
“To avenge Hank Rearden!” he had cried defiantly, tears running 
down his furnace-tanned face. 

Don’t let it hurt you like this — thought Dagny, slumped across her 
desk, over the page of the newspaper where a single brief paragraph 
announced the “temporary” end of Rearden Steel — don’t let it hurt 
you so much. . . . She kept seeing the face of Hank Rearden, as he 
had stood at the window of his office, watching a crane move against 
the sky with a load of green-blue rail . . . Don’t let it hurt him like 
this — was the plea in her mind, addressed to no one — don’t let him 
hear of it. don’t let him know. , . . Then she saw another face, a 
face with unflinching green eyes, saying to her, in a voice made 
implacable by the quality of respect for facts: “You’ll have to hear 
about it, . . . You’ll hear about every wreck. You'll hear about every 
discontinued train. . . . Nobody stays in this valley by faking reality 
in any manner whatever. . . Then she sat still, with no sight and 
no sound in her mind, with nothing buf that enormous presence 
which was pain — until she heard the famijiar cry that had become a 
drug killing all sensations except the capacity to act: “Miss Taggart, 
we don’t know what to do!” — and she st^>t to her feet to answer. 

“The People’s State of Guatemala,” sai$l the newspapers on Janu- 
ary 26, “declines the request of the United States for the loan ol a 
thousand tons of steel.” 

On the night of February 3, a young pilot was flying his usual 
route, a weekly flight from Dallas to New York City. When he 

992 



reached the empty darkness beyond Philadelphia— in the place 
where the flames of Rearden Steel had for years been his favorite 
landmark, his greeting in the loneliness of night, the beacon of a 
living earth — he saw a snow-covered spread, dead-white and phos- 
phorescent in the starlight, a spread of peaks and craters that looked 
like the surface of the moon. He quit his job. next morning. 

Through the frozen nights, over dying cities, knocking in vain at 
unanswering windows, beating on unechoing walls, rising above the 
roofs of lightless buildings and the skeletal girders of ruins, the plea 
went on crying through space, crying to the stationary motion of the 
stars, to the heatless fire of their twinkling: “Can you hear us, John 
Galt? Can you hear us?” 

“Miss Taggart, we don’t know what to do.” said Mr. Thompson: 
he had summoned her to a personal conference on one of his scurry- 
ing trips to New York. “We'ie ready to give in, to meet his terms, 
to let him take over— but where is he?” 

“For the third time,” she said, her lace and voice shut tight against 
any fissure of emotion, “I do not know where he is What made you 
think I did?” 

“Well, 1 didn’t know, 1 had to try . . I thought, just in case . . . 

I thought, maybe if you had a way to roach him — ” 

“I haven’t.” 

“You see, we can’t announce, not even by short-wave radio, that 
we’re willing to surrender altogether. People might hear it. But if 
you had some way to reach him, to let him know that we’re ready 
to give in, to scrap our policies, to do an\ thing he tells us to — ” 

“[ said I haven’t.” 

“If he’d only agree to a conference, just a conference, it wouldn’t 
commit him to anything, would it? We’re willing to turn the whole 
economy over to him — if he'd only tell us when, where, how. If he’d 
give us some word or sign ... if he'd answei us . . . Why doesn’t 
he answer?” 

“You’ve heard his speech.” 

“But what are we to do? We can't just quit and leave the country 
without any government at all. 1 shudder to think what would hap- 
pen. With ihe kind of social elements now on the loose — why. Miss 
Taggart, it's all 1 can do to keep them in line or we’d have plunder 
and bloody muider in broad daylight, 1 don’t know what’s got into 
people, but they just don’t seem to be civilized any more. We can’t 
quit at a time like this. We can neither quit nor run things any 
longer. What are we to do. Miss Taggart?” 

“Start decontrolling.” 

“Huh?” 

“Start lifting taxes and removing controls,” 

“Oh, no, no, no! That's out of the question!” 

“Out of whose question?” 

“1 mean, not at this time, Miss Taggart, not at this time. The 
country isn’t ready for it. Personally, I’d agree with you, Pm a free- 
dom-loving man. Miss Taggart, I’m not after power — but this is an 
emergency, People aren’t ready for freedom. We’ve got to keep a 
strong hand. We can’t adopt an idealistic theory, which — ” 

993 



"then don't ask me wftat to do," she said, and rose to her teet, 
"But, Miss Taggart — ” 

"I didn't come here to argue.” 

She was at the door when he sighed and said, "I hope he’s still 
alive.” She stopped. "I hope they haven’t done anything rash.” 

A moment passed before she was able to ask, "Who?” and to 
make it a word, not a scream. 

He shrugged, spreading his arms and letting them drop helplessly. 
"I can’t hold my own boys in line any longer. 1 can’t tell what they 
might attempt to do. There's one clique — the Ferris- Lawson-Meigs 
faction — that’s been after me lor over a year to adopt stronger mea- 
sures. A tougher policy, they mean. Frankly, what they mean is: to 
resort to terror. Introduce the death penalty for civilian crimes, for 
critics, dissenters and the like. Their argument is that since people 
won’t co-operate, won’t act for the public interest voluntarily, we’ve 
got to force them to. Nothing will make our system work, they say, 
but terror. And they may be right, from the look of things nowadays. 
But Wesley won’t go for strong-arm methods, Wesley is a peaceful 
man, a liberal, and so am 1. We re trying to keep the Ferris boys in 
check, but . . . You see, they're set against any surrender to John 
Galt. They don’t want us to deal with him. They don’t want us to 
find him. I wouldn't put anything past them. If they found him first, 
they’d — there’s no telling what they might do. . . . That’s what wor- 
ries me. Why doesn’t he answer? Why hasn't he answered us at all 9 
What if they’ve found him and killed him? I wouldn’t know. . . So 
I hoped that perhaps you had some way . . . some means of knowing 
that he’s still alive . . His voice trailed off into a question mark. 

The whole of her resistance against a rush of liquefying terror 
went into the effort to keep her voice as stiff as her knees, long 
enough to say, “I do not know,” and her knees stiff enough to carry 
her out of the room. 

* * 

From behind the rotted posts of what had once been a corner 
vegetable stand, Dagny glanced furtively back at the street: the rare 
lamp posts broke the street into separate islands, she could see a 
pawnshop in the first patch of light, a saloon in the next, a church 
in the farthest, and black gaps between them; the sidewalks were 
deserted; it was hard to tell, but the street seemed empty. 

She turned the corner, with deliberately resonant steps, then 
stopped abruptly to listen: it was hard to tell whether the abnormal 
tightness inside her chest was the sound of her own heartbeats, and 
hard to distinguish it from the sound of distant wheels and from the 
glassy rustle which was the East River sopiewhere dose by; but she 
heard no sound of human steps behind he*. She jerked her shoulders, 
it was part-shrug, part-shudder, and she walked faster. A rusty clock 
in some unlighted cavern coughed out th£ hour of four a m 
The fear of being followed did not seeirf fully real, as no fear could 
be real to her now. She wondered whether the unnatural lightness of 
her body was a state of tension or relaxation; her body seemed drawn 
so tightly that she felt as if it were reduced to a single attribute: to 
the power of motion; her mind seemed inaccessibly relaxed, like a 

994 



motor set to the automatic control of an absolute no longer to be 
questioned. If a naked bullet could feel in mid-flight, that is what it 
would feel, she thought; just the motion and the goal, nothing else. 
She thought it vaguely, distantly, as if her own person were unreal; 
only the word “naked” seemed to reach her: naked . . . stripped of 
all concern but for the target . . . for the number “367 ” the number 
of a house on the East River, which her mind kept repeating, the 
number it had so long been forbidden to consider. 

Three-sixty-seven— she thought, looking for an invisible shape 
ahead, among the angular forms of tenements— three-sixty-seven 
that is where he lives ... if he lives at all. . . . Her calm, her 
detachment and the confidence of her steps came fiom the certainty 
that this was an “if” with which she could not exist any longer. 

She had existed with it for ten days- -and the nights behind her 
were a single progression that had brought her to this night, as if 
the momentum now driving her steps were the sound of her own 
steps still ringing, unanswered, m the tunnels of the Teiminal. She 
had searched for him through the tunnels, she had walked for hours, 
night after night— the hours ot the shift he had once worked — 
through the underground passages and platlorms and shops and 
every twist of abandoned tracks, asking no questions of anyone, of- 
fering no explanations of her presence She had walked, with no 
sense of fear or hope, moved by a feeling ot despeiate loyalty that 
was almost a feeling of pride The root of that feeling was the mo- 
ments when she had stopped in sudden astonishment in some dark 
subterranean corner and had heard the words half-stated in her 
nnnd This is my railroad — as she looked at a vault vibrating to the 
sound of distant wheels; this is mv life — as she telt the clot of tension, 
which was the stopped and the suspended within herself; this is my 
love — as the thought of the man who, perhaps, was somewhere in 
those tunnels. Theie can be no conflict among these three . . . what 
am I doubting? . . . what can keep us apart, here, where only he and 
1 belong? . . . Then, recapturing the context ot the present, she had 
walked steadily on, with the sense of the same unbroken loyalty, but 
the sound of differ ent words: You have forbidden me to look for 
you, you may damn me, you may choose to discard .me . . but by 
the right of the fact that l am alive, I must know that you are . . . 
I must see you this once . . . not to stop, not to speak, not to touch 
you, only to see, . . . She had not seen him. She had abandoned her 
search, when she had noticed the curious, wondering glances of the 
underground workers, following her steps. 

She had called a meeting of the Terminal track laborers for the 
alleged purpose of boosting their morale, she had held the meeting 
twice, to face all the men in turn — she had repeated the same unintel- 
ligible speech, feeling a stab of shame at the empty generalities she 
uttered and, together, a stab of pride that it did not matter to her 
any longer— she had looked at the exhausted, brutalized faces of 
men who did not care whether they were ordered to work or to 
listen to meaningless sounds. She had not seen his face among them. 
“Was everyone present?” she had asked the foreman. “Ytah, 1 guess 
so,” he had answered indifferently. 

995 



She had loitered at the Terminal entrances, watching }he men as 
they came to work. But there were too many entrances to cover and 
no place where she could watch while remaining unseen— she had 
stood in the soggy twilight on a sidewalk glittering with rain, pressed 
to the wall of a warehouse, her coat collar raised to her cheekbones, 
raindrops falling off the brim of her hat — she had stood exposed to 
the sight of the street, knowing that the glances of the men who 
passed her were glances of recognition and astonishment, knowing 
that her vigil was too dangerously obvious. If there was a John Galt 
among them, someone could guess the nature of her quest ... if 
there was no John Galt among them ... if there was no John Galt 
in the world, she thought, then no danger existed — and no world. 

No danger and no world, she thought — as she walked through the 
streets of the slums toward a house with the number “367/’ which 
was or was not his home. She wondered whether this was what one 
felt while awaiting a verdict ol death: no fear, no anger, no concern, 
nothing but the icy detachment of light without heat or of cognition 
without values. 

A tin can clattered from under her toes, and the sound went beat- 
ing too loudly and too long, as if against the walls of an abandoned 
city. The streets seemed razed by exhaustion, not by rest, as if the 
men inside the walls were not asleep, but had collapsed. He would 
be home from work at this hour, she thought ... if he worked . . . 
if he still had a home. . . . She looked at the shapes of the slums, 
at the crumbling plaster, the peeling paint, the fading signboards ol 
failing shops with unwanted goods in unwashed windows, the sagging 
steps unsafe to climb, the clotheslines of garments unfit to wear, the 
undone, the unattended, the given up, the incomplete, all the twisted 
monuments of a losing race against two enemies: “no time'’ and “no 
strength” — and she thought that this was the place where he had 
lived for twelve years, he who possessed such extravagant power to 
lighten the job of human existence. 

Some memory kept struggling to reach her, then came back: its 
name was Starncsville, She felt the sensation of a shudder. But this 
is New York City! — she cried to herself m defense of the greatness 
she had loved; then she faced with unmoving austerity the verdict 
pronounced by her mind: a city that had left him in these slums for 
twelve years was damned and doomed to the future of Starncsville 

Then, abruptly, it ceased to matter; she felt a peculiar shock, like 
the shock of sudden silence, a sense of stillness within her, which 
she took for a sense of calm: she saw the number “367” above the 
door of an ancient tenement. 

She was cairn, she thought, it was only tiipe that had suddenly lost 
its continuity and had broken her perception into separate snatches, 
she knew the moment when she saw the mimber — then the moment 
when she looked at a fist on a board in ^he moldy halflight of a 
doorway and saw the words “John Galt, 5thi rear” scrawled in pencil 
by some illiterate hand — then the moment iwhen she stopped at the 
foot of a stairway, glanced up at the vanishing angles of the railing 
and suddenly leaned against the wall, trembling with terror, prefer- 
ring not to know — then the moment when $he felt the movement of 

996 



her foot coming to rest on the first of the steps— then a single, unbro- 
ken progression of lightness, of rising without effort or doubt or fear, 
of feeling the twisting installments of stairway dropping down be- 
neath her unhesitant feet, as if the momentum of her irresistible rise 
were coming from the straightness of her body, the poise of her 
shoulders, the lift of her head and the solemnly exultant certainty 
that in the moment of ultimate decision, it was not disaster she ex- 
pected of her life, at the end of a rising stairway she had needed 
thirty-seven years to climb. 

At the top, she saw a narrow hallway, its walls converging to an 
unlighted door. She heard the floorboards creaking in the silence, 
under her steps. She felt the pressure of her finger on a doorbell 
and heard the sound of ringing in the unknown space beyond. She 
waited. She heard the brief crack of a board but it came from the 
floor below She heard the sliding wail of a tugboat somewhere on 
the river. Then she knew that she had missed some span of time, 
because her next awareness was not like a moment of awakening, 
bur like a moment of birth’ as ifHwo sounds were pulling her out of 
a void, the sound ol a step behind the door and the sound ol a 
lock being turned — but she was not present until the moment when 
suddenly there was no door before her and the figure standing on 
the threshold was John Galt, standing casually in his own doorway, 
dressed m slacks and shirt, the angle ol his waistline slanting faintly 
against the light behind him 

She knew that his eyes were grasping this moment, then sweeping 
over its past and its future, that a lightning* process of calculation 
was bringing it into his conscious control— -and b\ the lime a told of 
his shirt moved with the motion of his breath, he Knew the sum — 
and the sum was a smile of radiant greeting. 

vShe was now unable to move. He seized her arm. he jerked her 
inside the room, she felt the dinging pressure of his mouth, she fell 
the slenderness of his bod) through the suddenly alien stiffness of 
her coal. She saw the laughter in his eyes, she felt the touch of his 
mouth again and again, she was sagging m his arms, she was breath- 
ing in gasps, as if she had not breathed for five flights of stairs, her 
face was pressed to the angle between his neck and shoulder, to hold 
him, to hold him with her arms, her hands and the skin of her cheek. 

“John . . . you're alive . . was all she could say 

He nodded, as if he knew what the words were intended to 
explain. 

Then he picked up her hat that had fallen to the floor, he took 
off her coat and put it aside, he looked at her slender, trembling 
figure, a sparkle of approval in his eyes, his hand moving over the 
tight, high-collared, dark blue sweater that gave to her body the 
fragility of a schoolgirl and the tension of a lighter. 

“The next time I see you,” he said, “wear a white one. It will 
look wonderful, too.” 

She realized that she was dressed as she never appeared m public, 
as she had been dressed at home through the sleepless hours of that 
night. She laughed, rediscovering the ability to laugh: she had ex- 
pected his first words to be anything but that. 

997 



“If there is a next time,” he added calmly. 

"What ... do you mean?” 

He went to the door and locked it. "Sit down,” he said. 

She remained standing, but she took the time to glance at the 
room she had not noticed: a long, bare garret with a bed in one 
corner and a gas stove in another, a tew pieces of wooden furniture, 
naked boards stressing the length of the floor, a single lamp burning 
on a desk, a closed door in the shadows beyond the lamp’s circle — 
and New York City beyond an enormous window, the spread of 
angular structures and scattered lights, and the shaft of the Taggart 
Building far in the distance. 

"Now listen carefully,” he said. "We have about half an hour, I 
think. 1 know why you came here. 1 told you that it would be hard 
to stand and that you would be likely to break. Don't regret it. You 
see? — 1 can’t regret it, either. But now, we have to know how to 
act. from here on. In about half an hour, the looters’ agents, who 
followed you, will be here to arrest me.” 

"Oh no!” she gasped. 

"Dagny, whoever among them had any remnant of human percep- 
tiveness would know that you’re not one of them, that you’re their 
last link to me, and would not let you out of his sight — or, the sight 
of his spies." 

"I wasn't followed! I watched, I — ” 

"You wouldn’t know how to notice it. Sneaking is one art they’re 
expert at. Whoever followed you is reporting to his bosses right now 
Your presence in this district, at this hour, my name on the board 
downstairs, the fact that 1 work for your railroad — it’s enough even 
for them to connect." 

• "Then let’s get out of here!” 

He shook his head. "They’ve surrounded the block by now. Your 
follower would have every policeman in the district at his immediate 
call. Now I want you to know what you'll have to do when they 
* come here. Dagny, you have only one chance to save me. If you did 
not quite understand what 1 said on the ladio about the man in the 
middle, you’ll understand it now. lb ere is no middle for you to take. 
And you cannot take my side, not so long as we’re in their hands. 
Now you must take their side.” 

“What?" 

"You must take their side, as fully, consistently and loudly as your 
capacity for deception will permit. You must act as one of them. 
You must act as my worst enemy. If you do. I’ll have a chance to 
come out of it alive. They need me too much, they'll go to any 
extreme before they bring themselves to kill me. Whatever they ex- 
tort from people, they can extort it only through their victim’s val- 
ues — and they have no value of mine to hojd over my head, nothing 
to threaten me with. But if they get the sfghtest suspicion of what 
we are to each other, they will have you o| a torture rack — 1 mean, 
physical torture — before my eyes, in less thin a week. 1 am not going 
to wait for that. At the first mention of a> threat to you, I will* kill 
myself and stop them right there.” 

He said it without emphasis, in the same impersonal tone of practi- 

m 



al calculation as the rest. She knew that he meant it and that he 
^as right to mean it: she saw in what manner she alone had the 
►ower to succeed at destroying him, where all the power of his ene- 
mies would fail. He saw the look of stillness in her eyes, a look of 
inderstanding and of horror. He nodded, with a faint smile. 

"1 don't have to tell you," he said, “that if f do it, it won’t be an 
ct of self-sacrifice. I do not care to live on their terms, I do not 
are to obey them and 1 do not care to see you enduring a drawnout 
nurder. There will be no values for me to seek after that— -and I do 
lot care to exist without values. 1 don’t have to tell you that we owe 
io morality to those who hold us under a gun. So use every power 
>f deceit you can command, but convince them that you hate me. 
Then we'll have a chance to remain alive and to escape — I don’t 
.now when or how. but Til know that I'm free to act. Is this 
mderstood?" 

She forced herself to lift her head, to look straight at him and 
o nod. 

“When they come," he said, “tell them that you had been trying 
o find me for them, that you became suspicious when you saw my 
lame on your payroll list and that you came here to investigate ’’ 

She nodded. 

“I will stall about admitting my identity- -they might recognize my 
(»ice, but I’ll attempt to deny it—so that it will be you who'll tell 
hem that I am the John Galt they're seeking." 

It took her a few seconds longer, but she nodded. 

“Afterwards, you'll claim — and accept — that live-hundrcd-thousand- 
lollar reward they’ve offered for my capture." 

She closed her eyes, then nodded. 

“Dagny,” he said slowly, “there is no way to serve your own values 
inder their system Sooner or later, whether you intended it or not, 
hey had to bring you to the point where the only thing you can do 
or me is to turn against me Gather your strength and do it — then 
ve il earn this one half-hour and. perhaps, the future." 

“I’ll do it," she said firmly, and added, “if that is what happens, 
f they — " 

“It will happen. Don’t regret it. I won’t. You haven’t seen the 
lature of our enemies. You’ll see il now If I have to be the pawn 
n the demonstration that will convince you. I’m willing to be — and 
o win you from them, once and for all. You didn’t want to wait any 
onger v Oh, Dagny, Dagny, neither did I!" 

It was the way he held her, the way he kissed her mouth that 
nade her feel as if every step she had taken, every danger, every 
ioubt, even her treason against him, if it was treason, all of it were 
giving her an exultant right to this moment. He saw the struggle if? 
ter face, the tension of an incredulous protest against herself — and 
ihe heard the sound of his voice through the strands of her hair 
tressed to his lips: “Don’t think of them now. Never think of pain 
?r danger or enemies a moment longer than is necessary to fight 
hem. You’re here. It's our time and our life, not theirs. Don't strug- 
gle not to be happy. You are." 

“At the risk of destroying you?" she whispered. 

999 



“You won't. But — yes, even that. You don’t think it's indifference, 
do you? Was it indifference that broke you and brought you here?” 

“I — ” And then the violence of the truth made her pull his mouth 
down to hers, then throw the words at his face: ”1 didn't care 
whether either one of us lived afterwards, just to see you this once!” 

“I would have been disappointed if you hadn't come.” 

“Do you know what it was like, waiting, fighting it, delaying it 
one more day, then one more, then — ” 

He chuckled. “Do I?” he said softly. 

Her hand dropped in a helpless gesture: she thought of his ten 
years. “When 1 heard your voice on the radio,” she said, “when I 
heard the greatest statement 1 ever . . . No, 1 have no right to tell 
you what I thought of it.” 

“Why not?” 

“You think that I haven’t accepted it.” 

“You will.” 

“Were you speaking from here?” 

“No, from the valley.” 

“And then you relumed to New York?” 

“The next morning.” 

“And you've been here ever since?” 

“Yes.” 

“Have you heard the kind of appeals they're sending out to you 
every night?” 

“Sure.” 

She glanced slowly about the room, her eyes moving from the 
towers of the city in the window to the wooden rafters o( his ceiling, 
to the cracked plaster of his walls, to the iron posts of his bed. 
“You’ve been here all that time,” she said. “You've lived here for 
twelve years . . . here . . . like this . 

“Like this,” he said, throwing open the door at the end of the 
room. 

She gasped: the long, light-flooded, windowless space beyond the 
threshold, enclosed in a shell of softly lustrous metal, like a small 
ballroom aboard a submarine, was the most efficiently modern labo- 
ratory she had ever seen. 

“Come in,” he said, grinning. “I don’t have to keep secrets from 
you any longer.” 

It was v like crossing the border into a different universe. She looked 
at the complex equipment sparkling in a bright, diffused glow, at the 
mesh of glittering wires, at the blackboard chalked with mathemati- 
cal formulas, at the long counters of objects shaped by the ruthless 
discipline of a purpose — then at the sagging boards and crumbling 
plaster of the garret, Either-or, she thought^ this was the choice con- 
fronting the world: a human soul in the imafcc of one or of the other. 

“You wanted to know where 1 worked for eleven months out of 
the year,” he said. ! 

“AH this,” she asked, pointing at the laboratory, “on the salary 
of’ — she pointed at the garret— “of an unskilled laborer?” 

“Oh, no! On the royalties Midas Mulligan pays me for his power- 

1000 



house, for the ray screen, for the radio transmitter and a few other 
jobs of that kind.” 

“Then . . , then why did you have to work as a track laborer?” 

“Because no money earned in the valley is ever to be spent 
outside.” ^ 

“Where did you get this equipment?” 

“I designed it. Andrew Stockton’s foundry made it.” He pointed 
to an unobtrusive object the size of a radio cabinet in a comer of 
the room: “ITiere’s the motor you wanted,” and chuckled at her 
gasp, at the involuntary jolt that threw her forward. “Don’t bother 
studying it, you won’t give it away to them now.” 

She was staring at the shining metal cylinders and the glistening 
coils of wire that suggested the rusted shape resting, like a sacred 
relic, in a glass coffin in a vault of the Taggart Terminal. 

“It supplies my own electric power for the laboratory,” he said. 
“No one has had to wonder why a track laborer is using such exorbi- 
tant amounts of electricity.” 

“But if they ever found this place — ” 

He gave an odd, brief chuckle. “They won t.” 

“How long have you been — ?” 

She stopped; this time, she did not gasp; the sight confronting her 
could not be greeted by anything except a moment of total inner 
stillness: on the wall, behind a row ol machinery, she saw a picture 
cut out of a newspaper— a picture of her, in slacks and shirt, standing 
by the side of the engine at the opening of the John Galt Line, her 
head lifted, her smile holding the context, the meaning and the sun- 
light of that day. 

A moan was her only answer, as she turned to him. but the look 
on his face matched hers in the picture. 

“f was the symbol of what you wanted to destroy in the world.” 
he said. “But you were my symbol of what I wanted to achieve.” 
He pointed at the pictuie. “ I his is how men expect to feel about 
their life once or twice, as an exception, in the course of their life- 
time. But I — this is what J chose as the constant and normal.” 

The look on his face, the serene intensity of his eyes and of his 
mind made it real to her, now, in this moment, in this moment’s full 
context, in this city. 

When he kissed her, she knew that their arms, holding each other, 
were holding then greatest triumph, that this was the reality un- 
touched by pain or fear, the reality of Halley’s Fifth Concerto, this 
was the reward they had wanted, fought tor and won. 

The doorbell rang. 

Her first reaction was to draw back, his — to hold her closer and 
longer. 

When he raised his head, he was smiling. He said only, “Now is 
the time not to be afraid.” 

She followed him back to the garret. She heard the door of the 
laboratory clicking locked behind them. 

He held her coat for her silently, he waited until she had tied its 
belt and put on her hat — then he walked to the entrance door and 
opened it. 


1001 



Three of the four men who entered were muscular figures in mili- 
tary uniforms, each with two guns on his hips, with broad faces 
devoid of shape and eyes untouched by perception, lire fourth, their 
leader, was a frail civilian with an expensive overcoat, a neat mus- 
tache, pale blue eyes and the manner of an intellectual of the public- 
relations species. 

He blinked at Galt, at the room, made a step forward, stopped, 
made another step and stopped. 

“Yes?’' said Galt. 

“Arc . . . are you John Galt?” he asked too loudly. 

“That’s my name.” 

“Are you the John Galt?” 

“Which one?” 

“Did you speak on the radio?” 

“When 9 ” 

“Don’t let him fool you.” The metallic voice was Dagny’s and it 
was addressed to the leader. “He — is — John — Galt. 1 shall report the 
proof to headquarters. You may proceed.” 

Galt turned to her as to a stranger. “Will you tell me now just 
who you are and what it was that you wanted here?” 

Her face was as blank as the faces of the soldiers. “My name is 
Dagny Taggart. 1 wanted to convince myself that you are the man 
whom the country is seeking ” 

He turned to the leader. “All right,” he said “I am John Galt— but 
if you want me to answer you at all, keep your stool pigeon” — he 
pointed at Dagny — “away from me.” 

“Mr. Galt!” cried the leader with the sound of an enormous jovial- 
ity. 4 *lt is an honor to meet you, an honor and a privilege! Please, 
Mr. Galt, don’t misunderstand us — we’re ready to grant you your 
wishes — no, of course, you don't have to deal with Miss Taggart, it 
you prefer not to — Miss Taggart was only trying to do her patriotic 
duty, but — ” 

“I said keep her away from me.” 

“We’re not your enemies, Mr Galt, I assure you we’re not your 
enemies.” He turned to Dagny. “Miss Taggart, you have pcrlormed 
an invaluable service to the people. You have earned the highest 
form of public gratitude. Permit us to take over from here on.” The 
soothing motions of his hands were urging her to stand back, to keep 
out of Galt’s sight. 

“Now what do you want?” asked Galt. 

“The nation is waiting for you, Mr. Galt. All we want is a chance 
to dispel misapprehensions. Just a chance to co-operate with you.” 
His gloved hand was waving a signal to his three men; the floor- 
boards creaked, as the men proceeded silently to the task of opening 
drawers and closets; they were searching $ie room. “The spirit of 
the nation will revive tomorrow morning. ^Ir. Galt, when they hear 
that you have been found.” 

“What do you want?” 

“Just to greet you in the name of the people.” 

“Am I under arrest?” 

“Why think in such old-fashioned terms? Our job is only to escort 

1002 



you safely to the top councils of the national leadership, where your 
presence is urgently needed.” He paused, but got no answer. ‘The 
country’s top leaders desire to confer with you— just to confer and 
to reach a friendly understanding.” 

The soldiers were finding nothing but garments and kitchen uten- 
sils; there were no letters, no books, not even a newspaper, as if the 
room were the habitation of an illiterate. 

“Our objective is only to assist you to assume your rightful place 
m society, Mr. Galt. You do not seem to realize your own public 
value.” 

T do.” 

“We are here only to protect you.” 

“Locked!” declared a soldier, banging his fist against the labora- 
tory door. 

The leader assumed an ingratiating smile. “What is behind that 
door, Mr. Galt?” 

“Private property.” 

“Would you open it, please?” 

“No” 

The leader spread his hands out in a gesture of pained help- 
lessness. “Unfortunately, my hands are tied. Orders, you know. We 
have to enter that room ” 

“Enter it.” 

“It’s only a formality, a mere formality. There’s no reason why 
things should not be handled amicably. Won’t you please co-operate?” 

“1 said, no.” 

“I’m sure you wouldn’t want us to re soil to an> . . . unnecessary 
means.” He got no answer. “We have the authority to break that 
door down, you know — but, of course, we wouldn’t want to do it.” 
He waited, but got no answer. “Force that lock!” he snapped to 
the soldier. 

Dagny glanced at Galt’s face. He stood impassively, his head held 
level, she saw the undisturbed lines of his profile, his eyes directed 
at the door. The lock was a small, square plate of polished copper, 
without keyhole or fixtuies. 

The silence and the sudden immobility of the three brutes were 
involuntary, while the burglar s tools in the hands of the fourth were 
grating cautiously against the wood of the door. 

The wood gave way easily, and small chips fell down, their thuds 
magnified by the silence into the rattle of a distant gun. When the 
burglar’s jimmy attacked the copper plate, they heard a faint rustle 
behind the door, no louder than the sigh of a weary mind. In another 
minute, the lock fell out and the dooi shuddered torward the width 
of an inch. 

The soldier jumped back. The leader approached, his steps irregu- 
lar like hiccoughs, and threw the door open. They faced a black hole 
of unknown content and unrelieved darkness. 

They glanced at one another and at Galt; he did not move; he 
stood looking at the darkness. 

Dagny followed them, when they stepped over the threshold, pre- 

U)03 



ceded by the beams of their flashlights. The space beyond was a long 
shell of metal, empty but for heavy drifts of dust on the floor, an 
odd, grayish-white dust that seemed to belong among ruins undis- 
turbed for centuries. The room looked dead like an empty skull. 

She turned away, not to let them see in her face the scream of 
the knowledge of what that dust had been a few minutes ago. Don’t 
try to open that door, he had said to her at the entrance to the 
powerhouse of Atlantis ... if you tried to break it down, the machin- 
ery inside would collapse into rubble long before the door would 
give way. . . . Don’t try to open that door — she was thinking, but 
knew that what she was now seeing was the visual form of the state- 
ment: Don’t try to force a mind. 

The men backed out in silence and went on backing toward the 
exit door, then stopped uncertainly, one after another, at random 
points of the garret, as if abandoned by a receding tide. 

“Well,” said Gait, reaching tor his overcoat and turning to the 
leader, “let’s go.” 

* + 

Three floors of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel had been evacuated 
and transformed into an armed camp. Guards with machine guns 
stood at every turn of the long, velvet-caipeted corridors. Sentinels 
with bayonets stood on the landings ol the fire-stairways. The eleva- 
tor doors of the fifty-ninth, sixtieth and sixty-first floors were pad- 
locked; a single door and one elevator were left as sole means of 
access, guarded by soldiers in full battle regalia Peculiar-looking 
men loitered in the lobbies, restaurants and shops of the ground 
floor: their clothes were too new and too expensive, in unsuccessful 
imitation of the hotel’s usual patrons, a camouflage impaired by the 
fact that the clothes were badly fitted to their wearers’ husky figures 
and were further distorted by bulges in places wheie the garments 
of businessmen have no cause to bulge, but the garments of gunmen 
have. Groups of guards with Tommy guns were posted at every en- 
trance and exit of the hotel, as well as at strategic windows of the 
adjoining streets. 

In the center ol this camp, on the sixtieth floor, in what was known 
as the royal suite of the Wayne-Falkiand Hotel, amidst satin drapes, 
crystal candelabra and sculptured garlands of flowers. John Galt, 
dressed m slacks and shirt, sat in a brocaded armchair, one leg 
stretched out on a velvet hassock, his hands crossed behind his head, 
looking at the ceiling. 

This was the posture in which Mr. Thompson found him, when 
the four guards, who stood outside the door of the royal suite since 
five a.m, opened it at eleven am. to admit Mr. Thompson, and 
locked it again. 

Mr. Thompson experienced a brief flash jof uneasiness when the 
click of the lock cut off his escape and left jhim alone with the pris- 
oner, But he remembered the newspaper deadlines dnd the radio 
voices, which had been announcing to the country since dawn; “John 
Galt is found! — John Galt is in New York! — John Galt has joined 
the people’s cause! — John Galt is in conference with the country’s 

1004 



leaders, working for a speedy solution of all our problems!”— and 
he made himself feel that he believed it. 

“Well, well, well!” he said brightly, marching up to the armchair. 
“So you’re the young fellow who’s started all the trouble— Oh,” he 
said suddenly, as he got a closer look at the dark green eyes watching 
him. “Well, I ... I’m tickled pink to meet you, Mr. Galt, just tickled 
pink.” He added, ‘Tm Mr. Thompson, you know.” 

“How do you do,” said Galt. 

Mr. Thompson thudded down on a chair, the brusqueness of the 
movement suggesting a cheerily businesslike attitude. “Now don’t go 
imagining that you’re under arrest or some such nonsense.” He 
pointed at the room. “This is no jail, as you can see. You can see 
that we’ll treat you right. You're a big person, a very big person — 
and we know it. Just make yourself at home. Ask for anything you 
please. Fire any flunky that doesn't obey you. And if you take a 
dislike to any of the army boys outside, just breathe the word — and 
we’ll send another one to replace him.” 

He paused expectantly. He received no answer. 

“ITie only reason we brought you here is just that we wanted to 
talk to you. We wouldn’t have done it this way, but you left us no 
choice. You kept hiding. And all we wanted was a chance to tell 
you that you got us all wrong ” 

He spread his hands out, palms up, with a disarming smile. Galt’s 
eyes were watching him, without answer. 

“That was some speech you made. Hoy. are you an orator! You’ve 
done something to the country— I don't know what or why, but you 
have. People seem to want something you've got. But you thought 
we'd be dead set against it? That’s where you're wrong. We're not. 
Personally, I think there was plenty in that speech that made sense. 
Yes, sir, I do. Of course, 1 don’t agree with every word you said — 
but what the hell, you don't expect us to agree with everything, do 
you? Differences of opinion- -that’s what makes horse racing. Me, 
I'm always willing to change my mind. Pm open to any argument.” 

He leaned forward invitingly. He obtained no answer. 

“The world is in a hell of a mess. Just as you said. There, I agree 
with you. We have a point in common. We can start trom that. 
Something’s got to be done about it. All I wanted was — Look,” he 
cried suddenly, “why don’t you let me talk to you?” 

“You are talking to me.” 

“I . , . well, that is . . . well, you know what I mean.” 

“Fully.” 

“Well? . . . Well, what have you got to say?” 

“Nothing.” 

“Huh?!” 

“Nothing.” 

“Oh, come now!” 

“I didn’t seek to talk to you.” 

“But ... but look! ... we have things to discuss!” 

“I haven’t.” 

“Look,” said 4 Mr. Thompson, after a pause, “you’re a man of ac- 

1005 



lion. A practical man. Boy, are you a practical man! Whatever else 
I don't quite get about you, I’m sure of that. Now aren't you?” 

‘Practical? Yes.” 

‘‘Well, so am I. We can talk straight. We can put our cards on the 
table. Whatever it is you’re after, I’m offeiing you a deal.” 

“I’m always open to a deal.” . 

“I knew it!” cried Mr. Thompson triumphantly, slamming his fist 
down on his own knee. “I told them so — all those fool intellectual 
theorizers, like Wesley!” 

“I’m always open to a deal — with anyone who has a value to 
offer me." 

Mr. Thompson could not tell what made him miss a beat before 
he answered, “Well, write your own ticket, brother! Write your 
own ticket!” 

“What have you got to offer me?” 

“Why — anything.” 

“Such as?” 

“Anything you name. Have you heard our short-wave broadcasts 
to you?” 

“Yes.” 

“We said we’ll meet your terms, any terms. We meant it.” 

“Have you heard me say on (he radio that 1 have no teims to 
bargain about? 1 meant it.” 

“Oh. but look, you misunderstood us! You thought we’d fight you. 
But we won’t. We’re not that rigid. WeYe willing to consider any 
idea Why didn’t you answer our calls and come to a conference?” 

“Why should I?” 

“Because . . because we wanted to speak to you in the name ol 
•the country.” 

“I don l recognize your right to speak in the name of the country.” 

“Now look here. I'm not used to . . . Well, okay, won’t you just 
give me a hearing? Won’t you listen?” 

“I’m listening.” 

“The country is in a terrible state. People arc starving and giving 
up, the economy is falling to pieces, nobody is producing any longer. 
We don’t know what to do about it. You do. You know how to 
make things work. Okay, we’re ready to give in. We want you to 
tell us what to do.” 

“1 told you what to do.” 

“What?” 

“Get out of the way.” 

“That’s impossible! That's fantastic! That’s out of the question!” 

“You see 9 I told you we had nothing to discuss.” 

“Now. wait! Wait! Don't go to extremes! There’s always a middle 
ground You can’t have everything. We afen’t . . . people aren’t 
ready for it. You can’t expect us to ditch the machinery of State. 
We’ve got to preserve the system. But wd’rc willing to amend It. 
We’ll modify it any way you wish. We’re dot stubborn, theoretical 
dogmatists — we’re flexible, We’ll do anything you say. We’ll give you 
a free hand We’ll cooperate. We’ll compromise. We’ll split fifty-fifty. 
We’ll keep the sphere of politics and give yOu total power over the 

1006 



phere of economics. We’ll turn the production of the country over 
o you, we’ll make you a present of the entire economy. You’ll run 
t any way you wish, you’ll give the orders, you’ll issue the direc- 
ives — and you’ll have the organized power of the State at your com- 
nand to enforce your decisions. We’ll stand ready to obey you, all 
rf us, from me on down. In the field of production, we’ll do whatever 
/ou say. You’ll be— you’ll be the Economic Dictator of the nation!” 

Galt burst out laughing. 

It was the simple amusement of the laughter that shocked Mr. 
Thompson. “What’s the matter with you?” 

“So that’s your idea of a compromise, is it?” 

“What’s the . . . ? Don’t sit there grinning like that! ... I don’t 
hmk you understood me. I’m offering you Wesley Mouch’s job— 
md there’s nothing bigger that anyone could offer you! . . . You’ll 
do free to do anything you wish. If you don’t like controls — repeal 
hem. If you want higher profits and lower wages — decree them. If 
/ou want special privileges for the big tycoons— grant them. If you 
Jon’t like labor unions — dissolve them. If you want a free economy — 
jrder people to be free! Play it any way you please. But get things 
going. Get the country organized. Make people work again. Make 
them produce. Bring back your own men — the men of brains. Lead 
us to a peaceful, scientific, industrial age and to prosperity.” 

“At the point of a gun?” 

“Now look, 1 . . . Now what’s so damn funny about it?” 

“Will you tell me just one thing: if you’re able to pretend that 
vou haven’t heard a word 1 said on the ladio, what makes you think 
I’d be willing to pretend that I haven’t said it?” 

“I don’t know what you mean! i— ” 

“Skip it. It was just a rhetorical question. The first part of it an- 
swers the second.” 

“Huh?” 

“I don't play your kind of games, brother— if you want a translation.” 

“Do you mean that you’re refusing my offer?” 

“I am.” 

“But why?” 

“It took me three hours on the radio to tell you why.” 

“Oh, that’s just theory! I'm talking business. I'm offering you the 
greatest job in the world. Will you tell me what's wrong with it?” 

“What I told you, in three hours, was that it won’t work.” 

“You can make it work.” 

“How?” 

Mr, Thompson spread his hands out. “I don’t know. If I did, l 
wouldn’t come to you. It's for you to figure out. You’re the industrial 
genius. You can solve anything.” 

“I said it can’t be done.” 

“ You could do it.” 

“How?” 

“Somehow,” He heard Galt’s chuckle, and added. “Why not? Just 
tell me why not?” 

“Okay, I’ll tell you. You want me to be the Economic Dictator?” 

“Yes!” 


1007 



“And you’ll obey any order I give?” 

“Implicitly!” 

“Then start by abolishing all income taxes.” 

“Oh, no!” screamed Mr. Thompson, leaping to his feet. “We couldn't 
do that! That’s . . . that's not the field of production. That’s the field 
of distribution. How would we pay government employees?” 

“Fire your government employees.” 

“Oh, no! That's politics! That’s not economics! You can’t interfere 
with politics! You can’t have everything!” 

Gait crossed his legs on the hassock, stretching himself more com- 
fortably in the brocaded armchair. “Want to continue the discussion? 
Or do you get the point?” 

“I only — ” He stopped. 

“Are you satisfied that I got the point?” 

“Look,” said Mr. Thompson placatingly, resuming the edge of his 
seat. “I don't want to argue. Fin no good at debates. I’m a man of 
action. Time is short. All I know is that you’ve got a mind. Just the 
sort of mind we need. You can do anything. You could make things 
work if you wanted to.” 

“All right, put it your own way: I don’t want to. 1 don’t want to 
be an Economic Dictator, not even long enough to issue that order 
for people to be free — which any rational human being would throw 
back in my face, because he’d know that his rights are not to be 
held, given or received by your permission or mine.” 

“Tell me,” said Mr. Thompson, looking at him reflectively, “what 
is it you're after?” 

“I told you on the radio.” 

“I don’t get it. You said that you’re out for your own selfish inter- 
est — and that , I can understand. But what am you possibly want in 
the future that you couldn’t get right now, from us, handed down to 
you on a platter? 1 thought you were an egoist — and a practical man 
1 offer you a blank check on anything you wish — and you tell me 
that you don’t want it. Why 9 ” 

“Because there are no funds behind your blank check.” 

“W/iar?” 

“Because you have no value to offer me.” 

“I can offer you anything you can ask. Just name it.” 

“You name it.” 

“Well, you talked a lot about wealth. If it’s money that you want— 
you couldn’t make in three lifetimes what I can hand over to you in 
a minute, this minute, cash on the barrel. Want a billion dollars — a 
cool, neat billion dollars?” 

“Which Til have to produce, for you to give me?” 

“No, I mean straight out of the public treasury, in fresh, new 
bills ... or ... or even in gold, if you prefer.” 

“What will it buy me?” 

“Oh, look, when the country gets back £n its feet — ” 

“When / put it back on its feet?” 

“Well, if what you want is to run things your own way, if it’s 
power that you’re after. I’ll guarantee you that every man, woman 

1008 



and child in this country will obey your orders and do whatever 
you wish.” 

“ After / teach them to do it?” 

“If you want anything for your own gang— for all those men 
who’ve disappeared — jobs, positions, authority, tax exemptions, any 
special favor at ail just name it and they’ll get it.” 

“After / bring them back?” 

“Well, what on earth do you want?” 

“What on earth do I need you for?” 

“Huh?” 

“What have you got to offer me that 1 couldn’t get without you?” 

There was a different look in Mr. Thompson’s eyes when he drew 
back, as if cornered, yet looked straight at Galt for the first time 
and said slowly, “Without me, you couldn’t get out of this room, 
right now.” 

Galt smiled. “True.” 

“You wouldn't be able to produce anything. You could be left 
here to starve.” 

“True.” 

“Well, don’t you see?” The loudness of homey joviality came back 
into Mr. Thompson’s voice, as if the hint given and received were 
now to be safely evaded by means of humor. “What I’ve got to olfer 
you is your life.” 

“It’s not yours to offer, Mr. Thompson.” said Galt softly. 

Something about his voice made Mr, Thompson jerk to glance at 
him, then jerk faster to look away, Galt’s smile seemed almost gentle 

“Now,” said Galt, “do you see what 1 mean when I said that a 
zero can’t hold a mortgage over life? It's l who’d have to grant you 
that kind of mortgage — and I don’t. The removal of a threat is not 
a payment, the negation of a negative is not a reward, the withdrawal 
of your armed hoodlums is not an incentive, the offer not to murder 
me is not a value.” 

“Who . . . who's said anything about murdering you*” 

“Who’s said anything about anything else? If you weren’t holding 
me here at the point ot a gun, under threat of death, you wouldn't 
have a chance to speak to me at all. And that is as much as your 
guns can accomplish. I don’t pay for the removal of threats. I don't 
buy my life from anyone.” 

“That’s not true,” said Mr. Thompson brightly, “If you had a 
broken leg, you’d pay a doctor to set it.” 

“Not if he was the one who broke it.” He smiled at Mr. Thomp- 
son’s silence. “I’m a practical man, Mr. Thompson. 1 don't think it’s 
practical to establish a person whose sole means of livelihood is 
the breaking of my bones. I don’t think it's practical to support a 
protection racket,” 

Mr. Thompson looked thoughtful, then shook his head. “I don’t 
think you’re practical,” he said. “A practical man doesn't ignore the 
facts of reality. He doesn’t waste his time wishing things to be differ- 
ent or trying to change them. He takes things as they are. We’re 
holding you. It’s a fact. Whether you like it or not, it’s a fact. You 
should act accordingly.” 


1009 



“I am.” 

'‘What I mean is, you should co-operate. You should recognize an 
existing situation, accept it and adjust to it.” 

“If you had blood poisoning, would you adjust to it or act to 
change it?” 

“Oh, that's different! That’s physical!” 

“You mean, physical facts are open to correction, but your whims 
are not?” 

“Huh?” 

“You mean, physical nature can be adjusted to men, but your 
whims are above the laws of nature, and men must adjust to you?” 

“I mean that 1 hold the upper hand!" 

“With a gun in it?” 

“Oh, forget about guns! I — ” 

♦‘I can't forget a fact of reality, Mr. Thompson. That would be 
impractical.'’ 

“AH right, then: 1 hold a gun. What are you going to do about it?” 

‘i’ll act accordingly. I'll obey you.” 

“ What?" 

“I’ll do whatever you tell me to.” 

“Do you mean it?” 

“I mean it. Literally .” He saw the eagerness of Mr. Thompson’s 
face ebb slowly under a look of bewilderment. ”1 will perform any 
motion you order me to perform. If you order me to move into the 
office of an Economic Dictator, I'll move into it. If you order me to 
sit at a desk, I will sit at it. If you order me to issue a directive, I 
will issue the directive you order me to issue.” 

“Oh, but 1 don't know what directives to issue!” 

“1 don’t, either.” 

There was a long pause. 

“Well 7 ” said Galt. “What arc your orders?” 

“I want you to save the economy of the country!” 

“I don’t know how to save it.” 

“I want you to find a way!” 

“I don’t know how to find it.” 

“1 want you to think!” 

“How will your gun make me do that, Mr. Thompson 7 ” 

Mr. Thompson looked at him silently— and Galt saw, in the tight- 
ened lips, in the jutting chin, in the narrowed eyes, the look of an 
adolescent bully about to utter that philosophical argument which is 
expressed by the sentence: I'll bash your teeth in. Galt smiled, look- 
ing straight at him, as if hearing the unspoken sentence and under- 
scoring it. Mr. Thompson looked away. 

“No,” said Galt, “you don’t want me to? think. When you force a 
man to act against his own choice and judgment, it’s his thinking 
that you want him to suspend. You want |um to become a robot. 1 
shall comply.” 

Mr. Thompson sighed. “I don’t get it,” he said in a tone of genuine 
helplessness. “Something’s off and l can’t figure it out. Why should 
you ask for trouble? With a brain like yours—you can beat anybody. 

1010 



I’m no match for you, and you know it. Why don’t you pretend to 
join us, then gain control and outsmart me?” 

For the same reason that makes you offer it: because vou’d win ” 

“Huh?” 

Because it s the attempt of your betters to beat you on your 
terms that has allowed your kind to get away with it for centuries. 
Which one of us would succeed, if I were to compete with you for 
control over your musclemen? Sure, I could pretend— and I wouldn't 
save your economy or your system, nothing will save them now— 
but I'd perish and what you’d win would be what you’ve always won 
in the past: a postponement, one more stay of execution, for another 
year — or month — bought at the price ol whatever hope and effort 
might still be squeezed out of the best of the human remnants left 
around you, tneluding me. That’s all you’re after and that is the 
length ot your range. A month? You’d settle lot a week— on the 
unchallenged absolute that there will always be another victim to 
find. But you’ve found your last victim— the one who refuses to play 
his historical part. The game is up, brother.” 

“Oh. that’s just theory!” snapped Mr Thompson, a little too 
sharply; his eyes were roving about the room, in the manner of a 
substitute for pacing; he glanced at the door, as it longing to escape. 
“You say that if we don’t give up the system, we ll perish?” he asked. 

“Yes.” 

“Then, since we’re holding you, you will perish with us?” 

“Possibly.” 

“Don’t you want to live?” 

“Passionately.” He saw the snap ol a spark in Mr. Thompson's 
eyes and smiled. “I’ll tell you more: I know (hat l want to live much 
more intensely than you do. I know that that’s what you're counting 
on 1 know that you. in fact, do not want to live at all. I want it. 
And because l want it so much, I will accept no substitute.” 

Mr. Thompson jumped to his feet. “That’s not true!” he cried. 
“My not wanting to live —it’s not true! Why do you talk like that?” 
He stood, his limbs drawn faintly together, as it against a sudden 
chill. “Why do you say such things? 1 don't know what you mean.” 
He backed a few steps away. “And it's not true that I’m a gunman. 
I’m not. I don’t intend to harm you I never intended to harm any- 
body. I want people to like me. 1 want to be your triend . . . i want 
to be your friend!” he cried to the space at large. 

Galt’s eyes were watching him, without expression, giving him no 
clue to what they were seeing, except that they were seeing it. 

Mr. Thompson jerked suddenly into bustling, unnecessary motions, 
as if he were m a hurry. “I've got to run along,” he said. “I . . , I 
have so many appointments. We’ll talk about it some more. Think 
it over, lake your time. I’m not trying to high-pressure you. Just 
relax, take it easy and make yourself at home. Ask for anything you 
like — food, drinks, cigarettes, the best of anything.” He waved his 
hand at Galt’s garments. “I'm going to order the most expensive 
tailor in the city to make some decent clothes for you. I want you 
to get used to the best. I want you to be comfortable and . . . Say,” 

1011 



he asked, a little too casually, “have you got any family? Any rela- 
tives you’d like to see?” 

“No.” 

“Any friends?” 

“No.” 

“Have you got a sweetheart?” 

“No.” 

“It s just that 1 wouldn’t want you to get lonesome. We can let you 
have visitors, any visitor you name, if there’s anyone you care for.” 

“There isn’t.” 

Mr. Thompson paused at the door, turned to look at Galt for a 
moment and shook his head. “I can’t figure you out,” he said. “I 
just can’t figure you out.” 

Galt smiled, shrugged and answered, “Who is John Galt?” 

* * 

A whirling mesh of sleet hung over the entrance of the Wayne - 
Falkland Hotel, and the armed guards looked oddly, desolately help- 
less in the circle of light: they stood hunched, heads down, hugging 
their guns for warmth — as if, were they to release all the spitting 
violence of their bullets at the storm, it would not bring comfort to 
their bodies. 

From across the street. Chick Morrison, the Moiale Conditioner - 
on his way to a conlercnce on the filly-ninth floor- -noted that the 
rare, lethargic passers-by were not taking the trouble to glance at 
the guards, as they did not take the trouble to glance at the soggy 
headlines of a pile ot unsold newspaper on the stand of a ragged, 
shivering vendor: “John Galt Promises Prosperity.” 

Chick Morrison shook his head uneasily six days of front-page 
stories — about the united efforts of the country's leaders working 
with John Galt to shape new policies- -had brought no results Peo- 
ple were moving, he observed, as if they did not care to sec anything 
around them. No one took any notice of his existence, except a 
ragged old woman who stretched out her hand to him silently, as he 
approached the lights of the entrance; he hurried past, and only 
drops of sleet tell on the gnarled, naked palm. 

It was his memory of the streets that gave a jagged sound to Chick 
Morrison’s voice, when he spoke to a circle of faces in Mr. Thomp- 
son’s room on the fifty-ninth floor. I'he look of the faces matched 
the sound of his voice. 

“It doesn’t seem to work.” he said, pointing to a pile of reports 
from his public-pulse-takers. “All the press releases about our collab- 
orating with John Galt don’t seem to make any difference. People 
don’t care. They don’t believe a word of it; Some of them say that 
he’ll never collaborate with us. Most of them don't even believe that 
we’ve got him. I don’t know what’s happened to people. They doo’t 
believe anything any more.” He sighed. “Three factories went out 
of business in Cleveland, day before yesterday. Five factories closed 
in Chicago yesterday. In San Francisco — ” 

“I know, I know,” snapped Mr. Thompson, tightening the muffler 
around his throat: the building’s furnace had gone out of order. 

1012 



“There's no choice about it: he’s got to give in and take over. He’s 
got to!” 

Wesley Mouch glanced at the ceiling. “Don’t ask me to talk to 
him again,” he said, and shuddered. “I’ve tried. One can’t talk to 
that roan.” 

“I . . . J can t, Mr. Thompson!” cried Chick Morrison, in answer 
to the stop of Mr. Thompson’s roving glance. “I’ll resign, if you want 
me to! 1 can’t talk to him again! Don’t make me!” 

“Nobody can talk to him,” said Dr. Floyd Ferris. “It’s a waste of 
time. He doesn’t hear a word you say.” 

Fred Kinnan chuckled. “You mean, he hears too much, don’t you? 
And what’s worse, he answers it.” 

“Well, why don’t you try it again?” snapped Mouch. “You seem 
to have enjoyed it. Why don’t you try to persuade him*” 

“1 know better,” said Kinnan. “Don’t fool yourself, brother. No- 
body’s going to persuade him, I won t try it twice. . . . Enjoyed it?” 
he added, with a look of astonishment. “Yeah . . . veah, f guess 
I did.” 

“What’s the matter with you? Are you falling for him? Are you 
letting him win you over?” 

“Me?” Kinnan chuckled mirthlessly, “What use would he have for 
me? I’ll be the first one to go down the drain when he wins. . . . It‘s 
only” — he glanced wistfully up at the ceiling---“it’s only that he’s a 
man who talks straight." 

“He won’t win!” snapped Mr. ' Thompson “It's out of the 
question!” 

There was a long pause. 

“There are hunger riots in West Virginia,” said Wesley Mouch. 
“And the farmers in Texas have — ” 

“Mr. ITiompson!” said Chick Morrison desperately. “Maybe . . . 
maybe we could let the public see him ... at a mass rally ... or 
maybe on TV . . . just see him. just so they'd believe that we've 
really got him. . . .It would give people hope, for a while ... it 
would give us a little time. . . 

“Too dangerous,” snapped Dr. Ferris. “Don’t let him come any- 
where near the public. There's no limit to what he’ll permit himself 
to do.” 

“He’s got to give in,” said Mr. Thompson stubbornly. “He’s got 
to join us. One ot you must—” 

“No!” screamed Eugene Lawson. “Not me! I don’t want to see 
him at all! Not once! I don’t want to have to believe it!” 

“What?” asked James Taggart; his voice had a note of dangerously 
reckless mockery; Lawson did not answer. “What are you scared 
of?” 'The contempt in Taggart’s voice sounded abnormally stressed, 
as if the sight of someone's greater fear were tempting him to defy 
his own, “What is it you’re scared to believe. Gene?” 

U I won’t believe it! 1 won't!” Lawson’s voice was half-snarl, half- 
whimper. “You can’t make me lose my faith iu humanity! You 
shouldn’t permit such a man to be possible! A ruthless egoist who — ’ 

“You’re a fine bunch of intellectuals, you are,” said Mr. Thompson 
scornfully. “I thought you could talk to him in his own lingo— but 

1013 



he’s scared the lot of you* Ideas? Where are your ideas now? Do 
something! Make him join us! Win him over!” 

“Trouble is, he doesn’t want anything,” said Mouch. “What can 
we offer a man who doesn’t want anything?” 

“You mean,” said Kinnan, /‘what can we offer a man who wants 
to live?’' 

“Shut up!" screamed James Taggart. “Why did you say that? What 
made you say it?” 

“What made you scream?” asked Kinnan. 

“Keep quiet, all of you!” ordered Mr. Thompson “You Ye fine at 
fighting one another, but when it comes to lighting a real man — ” 

“So he’s got you, too?” yelled Lawson. 

“Aw, pipe down,” said Mr. Thompson wearily. “He’s the toughest 
bastard I’ve ever been up against. You wouldn’t understand that. 
He's as hard as they come . . The faintest tinge of admiration 
crept into his voice. “As hard as they come . . .” 

“There are ways to persuade tough bastards,” diawted Dr. Ferris 
casually, “as I’ve explained to you.” 

“No!” cried Mr. Thompson. “No! Shut up! 1 won't listen to you\ 
I won’t hear of it!” His hands moved frantically, as if struggling to 
dispel something he would not name. “I told him . . . that that’s not 
true . . that we're not . . that I’m not a . . He shook his head 
violently, as if his own words were some unprecedented lorm of 
danger. “No, look, boys, what J mean is, we’ve got to be practical . . . 
and cautious. Damn cautious. We’ve got to handle it peacefully. We 
can’t aliord to antagonize him or . . . or harm him. We don’t dare 
take any chances on . . . anything happening to him. Because . 
because, if he goes, we go. He’s our last hope Make no mistake 
about it. If he goes, we perish. You all know it.” His eyes swept 
over the faces around him: they knew it. 

The sleet of the following morning fell down on front-page stories 
announcing that a constructive, harmonious conference between 
John Galt and the country’s leaders, on the previous afternoon, had 
produced “The John Galt Flan,” soon to be announced. The snow- 
flakes of the evening fell down upon the furniture of an apartment 
house whose front wall had collapsed — and upon a crowd of men 
waiting silently at the closed cashier's window of a plant whose 
owner had vanished 

“The farmers of South Dakota,” Wesley Mouch reported to Mr. 
Thompson, next morning, “are marching on the state capital, burning 
every government building on their way, and every home worth more 
than ten thousand dollars.” 

“California’s blown to pieces,” he reported in the evening. 
‘There’s a civil war going on there — if that’s what it is, which nobody 
seems to be sure of. They’ve declared that they’re seceding from the 
Union, but nobody knows who’s now in pow$r. There’s armed fight- 
ing all over the state, between a ‘People’s Parly,’ led by Ma Chalmers 
and her soybean cult of Orient-admirers-^and something called 
‘Back to God,’ led by some former oil-field owners.” 

“Miss Taggart!” moaned Mr. Thompson, when she entered his 

1014 



hotel room next morning, in answer to his summons. “What are we 
going to do?'* 

He wondered why he had once felt that she possessed some reas- 
suring kind of energy. He was looking at a blank face that seemed 
composed, but the composure became disquieting when one noticed 
that it lasted for minute after minute, with no change of expression 
no sign of feeling. Her face had the same look as all the others, he 
thought, except for something in the set of the mouth that sug- 
gested endurance. 

*i trust you. Miss Taggart. You’ve got more brains than all my 
boys,” he pleaded. “You’ve done more for the country than any of 
them — it's you who found him for us. What are we to do? With 
everything falling to pieces, he’s the only one who can lead us out 
of this mess — but he won’t. He refused. He simply refuses to lead. 
I’ve never seen anything like it: a man who has no desire to com- 
mand. We beg him to give orders— and he answers that he wants to 
obey them! It’s preposterous!” 

“It is.” 

“What do you make of it? Can you figure him out?” 

“He’s an arrogant egoist,” she said. “He’s an ambitious adven- 
turer. He’s a man of unlimited audacity who’s playing for the biggest 
stakes in the world.” 

It was easy, she thought. It would have been difficult in that distant 
time when she had regarded language as a tool of honor, always to 
be used as if one were under oath — an oath ol allegiance to reality 
and to respect for human beings. Now it was only a matter of making 
sounds, inarticulate sounds addressed to inanimate objects unrelated 
to such concepts as reality, human or honor. 

It had been easy, that first morning, to report to Mr. Thompson 
how she had traced John Galt to his home. It had been easy to watch 
Mr. Thompson's gulping smiles and his repeated cries of “ Thai’s my 
girl!” uttered with glances of triumph at his assistants, the triumph 
of a man whose judgment in trusting her had been vindicated. It had 
been easy to express an angry hatred for Galt “1 used to agree 
with his ideas, but I won t let him destroy my railroad!”— and to 
hear Mr. Thompson say, “Don’t you worry. Miss Taggart! WeTl 
protect you from him!” 

U had been easy to assume a look of cold shrewdness and to 
remind Mr. Thompson of the fivc-hundred-thousand-dollar reward, 
her voice clear and cutting, like the sound of an adding machine 
punching out the sum of a bill. She had seen an instant’s pause in 
Mr. Thompson’s facial muscles, then a brighter, broader smile — like 
a silent speech declaring that he had not expected it, but was de- 
lighted to know what made her tick and that it was the kind of 
licking he understood, “Of course. Miss Taggart! Certainly! That 
reward is yours — all yours! The check will be sent to you, in full!” 

It had been easy, because she had felt as if she were in some 
dreary non-world, where her words and actions were not facts any 
longer — not reflections of reality, but only distorted postures in one 
of those side-show mirrors that project deformity for the perception 
of beings whose consciousness is not to be treated as consciousness. 

1015 



Thin* single and hot* like the burning pressure of a wire within her, 
like a needle selecting her course, was her only concern: the thought 
of his safety. The rest was a blur of shapeless dissolution, half-acid, 
half-fog. 

But this — she thought with a shudder — was the state in which they 
lived, all those people whom she had never understood, this was the 
state they desired, this rubber reality, this task of pretending, dis- 
torting, deceiving, with the credulous stare of some Mr. Thompson’s 
panic-bleary eyes as one’s only purpose and reward. Those who de- 
sired this state — she wondered-— did they want to live? 

“The biggest stakes in the world. Miss Taggart?” Mr. Thompson 
was asking her anxiously. “What is it? What does he want?” 

“Reality. This earth.” 

“I don’t know quite what you mean, but . . . lA>ok. Miss Taggart, 
if you think you can understand him, would you . . . would you try 
to speak to him once more?” 

She felt as if she heard her own voice, many light-years away, 
crying that she would give her life to see him but in this room, she 
heard the voice ot a meaningless stranger saying coldly, “No, Mr. 
Thompson, I wouldn’t. 1 hope I’ll never have to see him again.” 

“I know that you can’t stand him, and 1 can't say I blame you, 
but couldn’t you just try to — ” 

“I tried to reason with him. the night I found him. I heard nothing 
but insults in return. I think he resents me more than he'd resent 
anyone else. He won’t forgive me the fact that it was 1 who trapped 
him. I’d be the last person to whom he would surrender.” 

“Yeah . . . yeah, that’s true ... Do you think he will ever 
surrender?” 

The needle within her wavered for a moment, burning its oscillat- 
ing way between two courses: should she say that he would not, and 
see them kill him? — should she say that he would, and see them 
hold onto their power till they destroyed the world? 

“He will,” she said firmly. “He’ll give in, it you treat him right. 
He's too ambitious to refuse power. Don’t let him escape, but don't 
threaten him-- or harm him. Fear won't work. He’s impervious to 
fear.” 

“But what if ... 1 mean, with the way things are collapsing . . . 
what if he holds out too long?” 

“He won’t. He’s too practical for that. By the way, are you letting 
him hear any news about the state of the country?” 

“Why . . . no.” 

“I would suggest that you let him have copies of your confidential 
reports. He’ll see that it won’t be long now?.” 

“That’s a good idea! A very good ideal . . . You know. Miss 
Taggart,” he said suddenly, with the sound i>f some desperate cling- 
ing in his voice, “I feel better whenever I talk to you. It’s becailse 
I trust you. I don’t trust anybody around mej But you— -you’re differ- 
ent. You’re solid.” 

She was looking unflinchingly straight ai him. “Thank you, Mr. 
Thompson,” she said. 

It had been easy, she thought — until she walked out into the street 

1016 



and noticed that under her coat, her blouse was sticking damply to 
her shoulder blades. 

Were she able to feel — she thought as she walked through the 
concourse of the Terminal — she would know that the heavy indiffer- 
ence she now felt for her railroad was hatred. She could not get rid 
of the feeling that she was running nothing but freight trains: the 
passengers, to her, were not living or human. It seemed senseless to 
waste such enormous effort on preventing catastrophes, on pro- 
tecting the safety of trains carrying nothing but inanimate objects. 
She looked at the faces in the Terminal: if he were to die, she 
thought, to be murdered by the rulers ol their system, that these 
might continue to eat, sleep and travel— would she work to provide 
them with trains? If she were to scream for their help, would one 
of them rise to his defense? Did they want him to live, they who 
had heard him? 

The check for five hundred thousand dollars was delivered to her 
office, that afternoon; it was delivered with a bouquet of flowers 
from Mr. Thompson. She looked at the check and let it flutter down 
to her desk: it meant nothing and made her feel nothing, not even 
a suggestion of guilt. It was a scrap of paper, of no greater signifi- 
cance than the ones m the office wastebasket. Whether it could buy 
a diamond necklace or the city dump or the last of her food, made 
no difference. It would never be spent. It was not a token of value 
and nothing it purchased could be of value. But this— she thought— 
this inanimate indifference was the permanent state of the people 
around her, of men who had no purpose and no passion. This was 
the stale of a non-valuing soul; those who chose it— she wondered— 


did thev want to live? 

The lights were out of order in the hall of the apartment house, 
when she came home that evening, numb with exhaustion— and she 
did not notice the envelope at her feet until she switched on the 
lmhl in her foyer. It was a blank, sealed envelope that had been 
slipped under hei door. She picked it up-and then within a mo- 
mint. she was laughing soundlessly, halt-kneeling, hall-sitting on the 
floor, not to move off that spot, not to do anything but stare at the 
note written by a hand she knew, the hand that had written its las 
message on the calendar above ihe city The note said: 


D sTt^tight. Watch them. When he’ll need our help, call 
me at OR 6-5693. 

F. 

The newspapers of the following mornmg admonished the pubhc 

not to believe the rumors that there was any trouble im the ^uthern 
states. The confidential reports, sent to * * for 

armed fighting had broken out betwee n £*£%£ 

the possession of a factory manufacti armg elcctncal eqmpmcn 
factory cut off by the fighting and by blasted railroad tracks Irom 
any source of raw materials. 


1017 



“Have you read the confidential reports 1 sent you?” moaned Mr, 
Thompson, that evening, facing Galt once more. He was accompa- 
nied by James Taggart, who had volunteered to meet the prisoner 
for the first time. 

Galt sat on a straight-backed chair, his legs crossed, smoking a 
cigarette. He seemed erect and relaxed, together. They could not 
decipher the expression on his face, except that it showed no sign 
of apprehension. 

“I have,” he answered. 

“There’s not much time left,” said Mr. Thompson. 

‘There isn’t ” 

‘'Are you going to let such things go on?” 

“Are you?" 

“How can you be so sure you’re right?” cried James Taggart; his 
voice was not loud, but it had the intensity of a cry. “How can you 
take it upon yourself, at a terrible time like this, to stick to your 
own ideas at the risk ot destroying the whole world?” 

“Whose ideas should I consider safer to follow?” 

“How can you be sure you’re right? How can you know ? Nobody 
can be sure of his knowledge! Nobody! You’re no better than any- 
one else!” 

“Then why do you want me?” 

“How can you gamble with other people’s lives? How can you 
permit yourself such a selfish luxury as to hold out, when people 
need you°” 

“You mean: when they need my ideas?” 

“Nobody is fully right or wrong! There isn't any black or white! 
You don’t have a monopoly on truth!” 

There was something wrong in Taggart’s manner — thought Mr. 
Thompson, frowning — some odd, loo personal resentment, as if it 
•were not a political issue that he had come here to solve. 

‘if you had any sense of responsibility,” Taggart was saying, “you 
wouldn’t dare take such a chance on nothing but your own judgment! 
You would join us and consider some ideas other than your own 
and admit that we might be right, too! You would help us with our 
plans! You would — ” 

Taggart went on speaking with feverish insistence, but Mr. Thomp- 
son could not tell whether Galt was listening: Gall had risen and 
was pacing the room, not in a manner of restlessness, but in the 
casual manner of a man enjoying the motion of his own body. Mr. 
Thompson noted the lightness of the steps, Jhe straight spine, the 
flat stomach, the relaxed shoulders. Galt walked as if he were both 
unconscious of his body and tremendously conscious of his pride in 
it. Mr. Thompson glanced at James Taggart* at the sloppy posture 
of a tall figure stumped in ungainly self^ist^rtion, and caught him 
watching Galt’s movements with such hatred that Mr. Thompson sat 
up, fearing it would become audible in the room. But Galt was not 
looking at Taggart. 

. . your conscience!” Taggart was saying, “1 came here to appeal 
to your conscience! How can you value your mind above thousands 

1018 



of human lives? People are perishing and— Oh, for Christ's sake," 
he snapped, “stop pacing!" 

Galt stopped. “Is this an order?" 

“No, no!" said Mr. Thompson hastily. “It’s not an order. We don't 
want to give you orders. . . . l ake it easy, Jim." 

Galt resumed his pacing. “The world is collapsing " said Taggart, 
his eyes following Galt irresistibly. “People are perishing— and it’s 
you who could save them! Does it matter who’s right or wrong? You 
should join us, even if you think we re wrong, you should sacrifice 
your mind to save them!" 

“By what means will 1 then save them?" 

“Who do you think you arc?" cried Taggart. 

Galt stopped. “You know it." 

“You’re an egoist!” 

“i am." 

“Do you realize what sort of egoist you are 7 " 

“Do you'V' asked Galt, looking straight at him 

It was the slow withdrawal of Taggart's body into the depth of his 
armchair, while his eyes were holding Gall’s, that made Mr. Thomp- 
son unaccountably afraid of the next moment. 

“Say," Mr. 'Thompson interrupted in a brightly casual voice, “what 
sort of cigarette are you smoking?" 

Gait turned to him and smiled I don’t know." 

“Where did you get it?" 

“One of your guards brought me a package of them. He said some 
man asked him to give it to me as a present. . . Don’t worry," he 

added, “your boys have put it through every kind of lest. There were 
no hidden messages. It was just a present from an anonymous 
admirer." 

The cigarette between Gait s fingers bore the sign of the dollar. 

James Taggart was no good at the job of persuasion, Mr. Thomp- 
son concluded. But Chick Morrison, whom he brought the next day, 
did no better. 

“1 . . . I’ll just throw myself on your mercy. Mr. Gall." said Chick 
Morrison with a frantic smile. “You’re right. I ll concede that you're 
right — and all 1 can appeal to is your pity. Deep down in my heart, 
I can’t believe that you’re a total egoist who feels no pity for the 
people." He pointed to a pile of papers he had spread on a table. 
“Here’s a plea signed by ten thousand schoolchildren, begging you 
to join us and save them. Here’s a plea from a home for the crippled. 
Here’s a petition sent by the ministers of two hundred different 
faiths. Here’s an appeal from the mothers of the country. Read 
them." 

“Is this an order?" 

“No!" cried Mr. Thompson. “It’s not an order!" 

Galt remained motionless, not extending his hand for the papers. 

“These are just plain, ordinary people, Mr Galt," said Chick Mor- 
rison in a tone intended to project their abject humility. “They can’t 
tell you what to do. They wouldn’t know. They're merely begging 
you. They may be weak, helpless, blind, ignorant. But you, who are 

1019 



so intelligent and strong, can’t you take pity on them? Can’t you 
help them?” 

“By dropping my intelligence and following their blindness?” 

“They may be wrong, but they don’t know any better!” 

“But I, who do, should obey them?” 

“I can’t argue, Mr. Oalt. I’m just begging for your pity. They’re 
suffering. Pm begging you to pity those who suffer, i’m . . . Mr. 
Gait,” he asked, noticing that Galt was looking off at the distance 
beyond the window and that his eyes were suddenly implacable, 
“what’s the matter? What are you thinking of?” 

“Hank Rearden.” 

“Uh . . . why?” 

“Did they feel any pity for Hank Rearden?” 

“Oh, but that’s different! He — ” 

“Shut up," said Galt evenly. 

“1 only — ” 

“Shut up!” snapped Mr. Thompson. “Don’t mind him, Mr. Galt. 
He hasn’t slept for two nights. He’s scared out of his wits.” 

Dr. Floyd Ferris, next day, did not seem to be scared — but it was 
worse, thought Mr. Thompson. He observed that Galt remained si- 
lent and would not answer Ferris at all. 

“It's the question of moral responsibility that you might not have 
studied sufficiently, Mr. Galt,” Dr. Ferris was drawling in too airy, 
too forced a tone of casual informality. “You seem to have talked 
on the radio about nothing but sins of commission. But there are 
also the sins of omission to consider. To fail to save a life is as 
immoral as to murder. The consequences are the same — and since 
we just judge actions by their consequences, the moral responsibility 
is the same. . . . For instance, in view of the desperate shortage of 
food, it has been suggested that it might become necessary to issue 
a directive ordering that every third one of all children under the 
age of ten and of all adults over the age of sixty be put to death, to 
secure the survival of the rest. You wouldn’t want this to happen, 
would you? You can prevent it. One word from you would prevent 
it. If you refuse and all those people are executed— it will be your 
fault and your moral responsibility!” 

“You’re crazy!” screamed Mr. Thompson, recovering from shock 
and leaping to his feet. “Nobody’s ever suggested any such thing! 
Nobody’s ever considered it! Please, Mr. Galt! Don’t believe him! 
He doesn’t mean it!” 

“Oh yes, he does,” said Galt. “Tell the bastard to look at me, 
then look in the mirror, then ask himself whether I would ever think 
that my moral stature is at the mercy of hti actions.” 

“Get out of here!” cried Mr. Thompson, ranking Ferris to his feet. 
“Get out! Don’t let me hear another squeajt out of you!” He flung 
the door open and pushed Ferris at the partied face of a guard 
outside. | 

Turning to Galt, he spread his arms and Jet them drop with a 
gesture of drained helplessness. Galt’s face Was expressionless. 

“Look,” said Mr. Thompson pleadingly, “Isn’t there anybody who 
can talk to you?” 


1020 



"There’s nothing to talk about.” 

‘We ve got to. We’ve got to convince you. Is there anyone you’d 
want to talk to?” 

“No.” 

“1 thought maybe . . . it’s because she talks— used to talk— like 
you, at times . . . maybe if I sent Miss Dagny Taggart to tell you—” 

“That one? Sure, she used to talk like me. She’s my only failure. 
I thought she was the kind who belonged on my side. But she dou- 
ble-crossed me, to keep her railroad. She’d sell her soul for her 
railroad. Send her in, if you want me to slap her face.” 

“No, no, no! You don’t have to see her, if that’s how you feel. I 
don't want to waste more time on people who rub you the wrong 
way. . . . Only . . . only if it’s not Miss Taggart, I don’t know whom 
to pick. ... If ... if 1 could find somebody you’d be willing to 
consider or . . .” 

“I’ve changed my mind,” said Galt. “There ts somebody I’d like 
to speak to.” 

“Who?” cried Mr. Thompson eagerly. 

“Dr. Robert Stadler ” 

Mr. Thompson emitted a long whistle and shook his head appre- 
hensively. “That one is no friend of yours,” he said in a tone of 
honest warning. 

“He’s the one 1 want to see.” 

“Okay, if you wish. If you say so. Anything you wish. I’ll have 
him here tomorrow morning.” 

That evening, dining with Wesley Mouch in his own suite, Mr. 
Thompson glared angrily at a glass of tomato juice placed before 
him. “What? No grapefruit juice?” he snapped: his doctor had pre- 
scribed grapefruit juice as protection against an epidemic of colds. 

“No grapefruit juice,” said the waiter, with an odd kind of 
emphasis. 

“Fact is,” said Mouch bleakly, “that a gang of raiders attacked a 
tiain at the Taggart Bridge on the Mississippi. They blew up the 
track and damaged the bridge. Nothing serious. It’s being repaired — 
but ail traffic is held up and the trains from Arizona can't get 
through.” 

“[hat's ridiculous! Aren’t there any other—?” Mr. Thompson 
stopped; he knew that there were no other railroad bridges across 
the Mississippi. After a moment, he spoke up in a staccato voice. 
“Order army detachments to guard the bridge. Day aDd night. Tell 
them to pick their best men for it. If anything happened to that 
bridge — ” 

He did not finish; he sal hunched, staring down at the costly china 
plates and the delicate hors d oeuvres before him. The absence of 
so prosaic a commodity as grapefruit juice had suddenly made real 
to him, for the first time, what it was that would happen to the city 
of New York if anything happened to the Taggart Bridge. 

“Dagny,” said Eddie Willers, that evening, “the bridge is not the 
only problem.” He snapped on her desk lamp which, m forced con- 
centration of her work, she had neglected to turn on at the approach 
of dusk. “No transcontinental trains can leave San Francisco. One 

1021 



of the fighting factions out there — I don’t know which one— has 
seized oUr terminal and imposed a ‘departure tax* on trains. Meaning 
that they’re holding trains for ransom. Our terminal manager has 
quit. Nobody knows what to do there now.” 

”1 can’t leave New York,” she answered stonily. 

“I know,” he said softly. “Tbat*s why it’s I who'll go there to 
straighten things out. At least, to find a man to put in charge.” 

“No! 1 don’t want you to. It’s too dangerous. And what for? It 
doesn’t matter now. There’s nothing to save.” 

“It's still Taggart Transcontinental. I’ll stand by it. Dagny, wher- 
ever you go, you’ll always be able to build a railroad. I couldn’t. I 
don’t even want to make a new start. Not any more. Not after what 
I’ve seen. You should. I can’t. Let me do what I can.” 

“Eddie! Don’t you want — ” She stopped, knowing that it was use- 
less. “All right, Eddie. If you wish.” 

“I'm flying to California tonight. I’ve arranged for space on an 
army plane. ... I know that you will quit as soon as ... as soon as 
you can leave New York. You might be gone by the time I return. 
When you’re ready, just go. Don’t worry about me. Don’t wait to 
tell me. Go as fast as you can. . . . I’ll say good-bye to you, now.” 

She rose to her feet. They stood facing each other: in the dim 
halflight of the office, the picture of Nathaniel Taggart hung on the 
wall between them. They were both seeing the years since that dis- 
tant day when they had first learned to walk down the track of a 
railroad. He inclined his head and held it lowered for a long moment. 

She extended her hand. “Good-bye, Eddie.” 

He clasped her hand firmly, not looking down at his fingers; he 
was looking at her face. 

He started to go, but stopped, turned to her and asked, his voice 
low, but steady, neither as plea nor as despair, but as a last gesture 
of conscientious clarity to close a long ledger, “Dagny ... did you 
know . . , how I felt about you 7 ” 

“Yes,” she said softly, realizing in this moment that she had known 
it wordlessly for years, “I knew it ” 

“Good-bye, Dagny.” 

The faint rumble of an underground train went through the walls 
of the building and swallowed the sound of the door closing alter 
him. 

It was snowing, next morning, and melting drops were like an icy, 
cutting touch on the temples of Dr. Robert Stadler, as he walked 
down the long corridor of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel, toward the 
door of the royal suite. Two husky men walked by his sides: they 
were from the department of Morale Conditioning, but did not trou- 
ble to hide what method of conditioning t|ey would welcome a 
chance to employ. 

“Just remember Mr. Thompson’s orders,” jjone of them told him* 
contemptuously. “One wrong squawk out of you — and you’ll regret 
it, brother.” * 

It was not the snow on his temples — thought Dr. Stadler — it was 
a burning pressure, it had been there since that scene, last night, 
when he had screamed to Mr. ITiompson that he could not see John 

1022 



Gait. He had screamed in blind terror, begging a circle of impassive 
faces not to make him do it, sobbing that he would do anything but 
that. The faces bad not condescended to argue or even to threaten 
him; they had merely given him orders. He had spent a sleepless 
night, telling himself that he would not obey; but he was walking 
toward that door, the burning pressure on his temples and the faint, 
dizzying nausea of unreality came from the fact that he could not 
recapture the sense of being Dr. Robert Stadler. 

He noticed the metallic gleam of the bayonets held by the guards at 
the door, and the sound of a key being turned in a lock. He found 
himself walking forward and heard the door being locked behind him. 

Across the long room, he saw John Galt sitting on the window 
sill, a tall, slender figure in slacks and shirt, one leg slanting down 
to the floor, the other bent, his hands clasping his knee, his head of 
sun-streaked hair raised against a spread of gray sky -and suddenly 
Dr, Stadler saw the figure of a young boy sitting on the porch-railing 
of his home, near the campus of the Patrick Henry University, with 
the sun on the chestnut hair of a head lifted against a spread of 
summer blue, and he heard the passionate intensity of his own voice 
saying twenty-two years ago: “The only sacred value in the world, 
John, is the human mind, the inviolate human mind . . — and he 

cried to that boy’s figure, across the loom and across the years: 

“1 couldn’t help it, John! 1 couldn’t help it!” 

He gripped the edge of a table between them, for support and as 
a protective barrier, even though the figure on the window sill had 
not moved. 

“I didn’t bring you to this!’’ he cried. “1 didn’t mean to! 1 couldn’t 
help it! It’s not what I intended! . . . John! I’m not to blame for it! 
Fm not! I never had a chance against them! They own the world! 
They left me no place in it! . . . What's reason to them? What's 
science? You don’t know' how deadly they are! You don’t understand 
them! They don't think! They’re mindless animals moved by irratio- 
nal feelings — by their greedy, grasping, blind, unaccountable feelings! 
They seize whatever they want, that’s all they know: that they want 
it, regardless of cause, effect or logic — they want it, the bloody, grub- 
bing pigs! . . . The mind? Don’t you know how futile it is, the 
mind, against those mindless hordes? Our weapons are so helplessly, 
laughably childish: truth, knowledge, reason, values, rights! Force is 
all they know, force, fraud and plunder! . . . John! Don’t look at me 
like that! What could i do against their fists 7 1 had to live, didn’t 1? 
It wasn’t for myself— it was for the future of science! I had to be 
left alone, I had to be protected, I had to make terms with them— 
there’s no way to live except on their terms — there isn’t! — do you 
hear me? — there isn’t! . . . What did you want me to do? Spend my 
life begging for jobs? Begging my inferiors for funds and endow- 
ments? Did you want my work to depend on the mercy of the ruffi- 
ans who have a knack for making money? I had no time to compete 
with them for money or markets or any of their miserable material 
pursuits! Was that your idea of justice— that they should spend their 
money on liquor, yachts and women, while the priceless hours of my 
life were wasted for lack of scientific equipment? Persuasion? How 

1023 



could I persuade them? What language could l speak to men who 
don't think? . . . You don’t know how lonely I was, how starved for 
some spark of intelligence! How lonely and tired and helpless! Why 
should a mind like mine have to bargain with ignorant fools? They’d 
never contribute a penny to science! Why shouldn’t they be forced? 
It wasn’t you that I wanted to force! That gun was not aimed at the 
intellect! It wasn’t aimed at men like you and me, only at mindless 
materialists! . . . Why do you look at me that way? 1 had no choice! 
There isn’t any choice except to beat them at their own game! Oh 
yes, it is their game, they set the rules! What do we count, the few 
who can think? We can only hope to get by, unnoticed — and to trick 
them into serving our aims! . . . Don’t you know how noble a purpose 
it was — my vision of the future of science? Human knowledge set 
free of material bonds! An unlimited end unrestricted by means! I 
am not a traitor, John! I’m not! I was serving the cause of the mind! 
What I saw ahead, what 1 wanted, what I felt, was not to be measured 
in their miserable dollars! I wanted a laboratory! 1 needed it! What 
do I care where it came from or how? 1 could do so much! I could 
reach such heights! Don’t you have any pity? 1 wanted it! . . . What 
if they had to be forced? Who are they to think, anyway? Why did 
you teach them to rebel? It would have worked, if you hadn’t with- 
drawn them! It would have worked, l tell you! It wouldn’t be — like 
this! . . . Don’t accuse me! We can't be guilty ... all of us . . . for 
centuries. . . . We can’t be so totally wrong! . . . We’re not to be 
damned! We had no choice! There is no other way to live on 
earth! . . . Why don’t you answer me? What are you seeing? Are 
you thinking of that speech you made? I don't want to think of it! 
k was only logic! One can’t live by logic! Do you hear me 7 . . . 
Don’t look at me! You’re asking the impossible! Men can’t exist 
your way! You permit no moments of weakness, you don’t allow for 
human frailties or human feelings! What do you want of us? Ratio- 
nality twenty-four hours a day, with no loophole, no rest, no 
escape? . . . Don’t look at me, God damn you! I’m not afraid of you 
any longer! Do you hear me? f am not afraid! Who are you to blame 
me, you miserable failure? Here’s where your road has brought you! 
Here you are, caught, helpless, under guard, to be killed by those 
brutes at any moment — and you dare to accuse me of being impracti- 
cal! Oh yes, you’re going to be killed! You won’t win! You can’t be 
allowed to win! You are the man who has to be destroyed!” 

Dr. Stadler’s gasp was a muffled scream, as if the immobility of 
the figute on the window sill had served as a silent reflector and had 
suddenly made him see the full meaning of his own words. 

“No!” moaned Dr. Stadler, moving his he&d from side to side, to 
escape the unmoving green eyes. “No! . . . - * • No!” 

Galt’s voice had the same unbending austerity as his eyes: “You 
have said everything l wanted to say to you|” 

Dr. Stadler banged his fists against the dopr; when it was opened, 
he ran out of the room. 

* * 

For three days, no one entered Galt’s suite except the guards who 
brought his meals. Early on the evening of the fourth day, the door 

1024 



opened to admit Chick Morrison with two companions. Chick Mor- 
rison was dressed in dinner clothes, and his smile was nervous but 
a shade more confident than usual. One of his companions was a 
valet The other was a muscular man whose face seemed to clash 
with his tuxedo: it was a stony face with sleepy eyelids, pale, darting 
eyes and a prizefighter’s broken nose; his skull was shaved except 
for a patch of faded blond curls on top; he kept his right hand m 
the pocket of his trousers. 

“You will please dress. Mr. Galt,” said Chick Morrison persua- 
sively, pointing to the door of the bedroom, where a closet had been 
filled with expensive garments which Galt had not chosen to wear. 
“You will please put on your dinner clothes.” He added, “This is 
an order, Mr. Galt.” 

Galt walked silently into the bedroom. The three men followed. 
Chick Morrison sat on the edge of a chair, starting and discarding 
one cigarette after another. The valet went through too many too 
courteous motions, helping Galt to dress, handing him his shin studs, 
holding his coat. The muscular man stood m a corner, his hand in 
his pocket. No one said a word. 

“You will please co-operate, Mr. Galt,” said Chick Morrison, when 
Galt was ready, and indicated the door with a courtly gesture of 
invitation to proceed. 

So swiftly that no one could catch the motion of his hand, the 
muscular man was holding Galt’s arm and pressing an invisible gun 
against his ribs. "‘Don’t make any false moves,” he said in an expres- 
sionless voice. 

”1 never do,” said Galt. 

Chick Morrison opened the door. The valet stayed behind. The 
three figures in dinner clothes walked silently down the hall to the 
elevator. 

They remained silent in the elevator, the clicks of the flashing 
numbers above the door marking their downward progress. 

The elevator stopped on the mezzanine floor. Two armed soldiers 
preceded them and two others followed, as they walked through the 
long, dim corridors. The corridors were deserted except for armed 
sentinels posted at the turns The muscular man’s right arm was 
linked to Galt’s left; the gun remained invisible to any possible ob- 
server. Galt felt the small pressure of the muzzle against his side; 
the pressure was expertly maintained: not to be felt as an impedi- 
ment and not to be forgotten for a moment. 

The corridor led to a wide, closed doorway. The soldiers seemed 
to melt away into the shadows, when Chick Morrison’s hand touched 
the doorknob* It was his hand that opened the door, but the sudden 
contrast of light and sound made it seem as if the door were flung 
open by an explosion: the light came from three hundred bulbs in 
the blazing chandeliers of the grand ballroom of the Wayne-Falkland 
Hotel; the sound was the applause of five hundred people. 

Chick Morrison led the way to the speakers’ table raised on a 
platform above the tables filling the room. The people seemed to 
know, without announcement, that of the two figures following him, 
it was the tall, slender man with the gold-copper hair that they were 

1025 



applauding. His face had the same quality as the voice they had 
heard on the radio: calm, confident — and out of reach. 

The seat reserved for Galt was the place of honor in the center 
of the long table, with Mr. Thompson waiting for him at his right 
and the muscular man slipping skillfully into the seat at his left, not 
relinquishing his arm or the pressure of the muzzle. The jewels on 
the naked shoulders of women carried the glitter of the chandeliers 
to the shadows of the tables crowded against the distant walls; the 
severe black-and-white of the men’s figures rescued the room’s style 
of solemnly regal luxury from the discordant slashes made by news 
cameras, microphones and a dormant array of television equipment. 
The crowd was on its feet, applauding. Mr. Thompson was smiling 
and watching Galt’s face, with the eager, anxious look of an adult 
waiting for a child's reaction to a spectacularly generous gift. Galt 
sat facing the ovation, neither ignoring it nor responding, 

“The applause you are hearing,” a radio announcer was yelling 
into a microphone in a comer of the room, “is in greeting to John 
Galt, who has just taken his place at the speakers' table! Yes, my 
friends, John Galt in person— as those of you who can find a televi- 
sion set will have a chance to see for yourself in a short while!'’ 

1 must remember where 1 am — thought Dagny, clenching her fists 
under the tablecloth, in the obscurity of a side table. It was hard to 
maintain a sense of double reality in the presence of Galt, thirty feet 
away from her. She felt that no danger or pain could exist in the 
world so long as she could see his face — and, simultaneously, an icy 
terror, when she looked at those who held him in their power, when 
she remembered the blind irrationality of the event they were stag- 
ing. She fought to keep her facial muscles rigid, not to betray herself 
by a smile of happiness or by a scream of panic. 

She wondered how his eyes had been able to find her in that 
, crowd. She had seen the brief pause of his glance, which no one else 
could notice; the glance had been more than a kiss, it had been a 
handshake of approval and support. 

He did not glance again in her direction. She could not force 
herself to look away. It was startling to see him in evening clothes 
and more startling still that he wore them so naturally; he made 
them look like a work uniform of honor; his figure suggested the 
kind of banquet, in the days of a distant past, where he would have 
been receiving an industrial award. Celebrations— -she remembered 
her own words, with a stab of longing — should be only for those 
who have something to celebrate. 

She turned away. She struggled not to loojk at him too often, not 
to attract the attention of her companions. $he had been placed at 
a table prominent enough to display her to tNe assembly, but obscure 
enough to keep her out of the line of Galt’sl sight, along with those 
who had incurred Galt’s disfavor; with dr. Ferris and Eugene 
Lawson. 

Her brother, Jim, she noted, had been placed closer to the plat- 
form; she could see his sullen face among the nervous figures of 
Tinky Holloway, Fred Kinnan, Dr. Simon Pritchett. The tortured 
faces strung out above the speakers’ table were not succeeding in 

1026 



thcif efforts to hide that they looked like men enduring an ordeal; 
the calm of Galt’s face seemed radiant among them; she wondered 
who was prisoner here and who was master. Her glance moved 
slowly down the line-up of his table: Mr. Thompson, Wesley Mouch, 
Chick Morrison, some generals, some members of the Legislature 
and, preposterously, Mr. Mowen, chosen as a bribe to Gall, as a 
symbol of big business. She glanced about the room, looking for the 
face of Dr. Stadler; he was not present. 

The voices filling the room were like a fever chart, she thought; 
they kept darting too high and collapsing into patches of silence; the 
occasional spurts of someone's laughter broke off, incomplcted, and 
attracted the shuddering turn of the heads at the neighboring tables. 
Ibe faces were drawn and twisted by the most obvious and least 
dignified form of tension: by forced smiles. These people— she 
thought — knew, not by means of their reason, but by means of their 
panic, that this banquet was the ultimate climax and the naked es- 
sence of their world. ITiey knew that neither their God nor their 
guns could make this celebration mean what they were struggling to 
pretend it meant. 

She could not swallow the food that was placed before her; her 
throat seemed closed by a rigid convulsion. She noticed that the 
others at her tabic were also merely pretending to cat. Dr. Ferris 
was the only one whose appetite seemed unaffected 

When she saw a slush of ice cream in a crystal bowl before her, 
she noticed the sudden silence of the room and heard the screeching 
of the television machinery being dragged forward for action. Now — 
she thought, with a sinking sense of expectation, and knew that the 
same question mark was on every mind in the room. They were all 
staring at Galt. His face did not move or change. 

No one had to call for silence, when Mr, Thompson waved to an 
announcer, the room did not seem to breathe. 

"‘Fellow citizens,” the announcer cried into a microphone, “of this 
country and of any other that's able lo listen — from the grand ball 
room of the Wayne-Falkland Hotel in New York City, wc are bring- 
ing you the inauguration of the John Gall Plan!" 

A rectangle of tensely bluish light appeared on the wall behind 
the speakers’ table — a television screen to project for the guests the 
images which the country was now to see. 

“The John Gall Plan for Peace, Prosperity and Profit!” cried the 
announcer, while a shivering picture of the ballroom sprang into view 
on the screen. “The dawn of a new age! The product of a harmoni- 
ous collaboration between the humanitarian spirit of our leaders and 
the scientific genius of John Galt! If your faith in the future has been 
undermined by vicious rumors, you may now see for yourself our 
happily united family of leadership! . . . Ladies and gentlemen” as 
the television camera swooped down to the speakers’ table, and the 
stupefied face of Mr. Mowen filled the screen — “Mr. Horace Bussby 
Mowen, the American Industrialist!” The camera moved to an aged 
collection of facial muscles shaped in imitation of a smile. “General 
of the Army Whittington S. Iborpe!” The camera, like an eye at a 
police line-up, moved from face to scarred face — scarred by the rav- 

1027 



ages of fear, of evasion, of despair, of uncertainty, of self-loathing, 
of guilt, “Majority Leader of the National Legislature, Mr. Lucian 
Phelps! . . , Mr. Wesley Mouch! . . . Mr. Thompson!” The camera 
paused on Mr. Thompson: he gave a big grin to the nation, then 
turned and looked off-screen, to his left, with an air of triumphant 
expectancy. “Ladies and gentlemen,” the announcer said solemnly, 
“John Gait!” 

Good God! — thought Dagny — what are they doing? From the 
screen, the face of John Galt was looking at the nation, the face 
without pain or fear or guilt, implacable by virtue of serenity, invul- 
nerable by virtue of self-esteem. This face — she thought — among 
those others? Whatever it is that they’re planning, she thought, it’s 
undone — nothing more can or has to be said — there’s the product of 
one code and of the other, there’s the choice, and whoever is human 
will know it. 

“Mr. Galt’s personal secretary.” said the announcer, while the 
camera blurred hastily past the next face and went on. “Mr. Clarence 
‘Chick’ Morrison . . . Admiral Homer Dawley . . . Mr. — ” 

She looked at the faces around her, wondering: Did they see the 
contrast? Did they know it? Did they see him? Did they want him 
to be real? 

“This banquet,” said Chick Morrison, who had taken over as mas- 
ter of ceremonies, “is in honor of the greatest figure of our time, 
the ablest producer, the man of the ‘know-how,’ the new leader ot 
our economy — John Galt! If you have heard his extraordinary radio 
speech, you can have no doubt that he can make things work. Now 
he is here to tell you that he will make them work for you. If you 
have been misled by those old-fashioned extremists who claimed that 
he would never join us, that no merger is possible between his way 
of life and ours, that it’s cither one or the other— tonight’s event 
will prove to you that anything can be reconciled and united!” 

Once they have seen him — thought Dagny— can they wish to look 
at anybody else? Once they know that he is possible, that this is 
what man can be, what else can they want to seek? Can they now 
feel any desire except to achieve in their souls what he has achieved 
in his? Or arc they going to be stopped by the fact that the Mouches, 
the Morrisons, the Thompsons of the world had not chosen to 
achieve it? Are they going to regard the Mouches as the human and 
him as the impossible? 

The camera was roving over the ballroom, Hashing to the screen 
and to the country the faces of the prominent guests, the faces of 
the tensely watchful leaders and — once in & while — the face of John 
Galt. He looked as if his perceptive eye^ were studying the men 
outside this room, the men who were seeir|g him across the country; 
one could not tell whether he was listening no reaction altered the 
composure of his face. * 

“I am proud to pay tribute tonight,” saidHhe leader of the Legisla- 
ture, the next speaker, “to the greatest economic organizer the world 
has ever discovered, the most gifted administrator, the most brilliant 
planner — John Galt, the man who will save us! I am here to thank 
him in the name of the people!” 

1028 



This— “thought Dagny, with a sickened amusement — was 
facie of the sincerity of the dishonest. The most fraudulent part of 
the fraud was that they meant it. They were offering Galt the best 
that their view of existence could offer, they were trying to tempt 
him with that which was their dream of life’s highest fulfillment: this 
spread of mindless adulation, the unreality of this enormous pre- 
tense-approval without standards, tribute without content, honor 
without causes, admiration without reasons, love without a code of 
values. 

“We have discarded all our petty differences,” Wesley Mouch was 
now saying into the microphone, “all partisan opinions, all personal 
interests and selfish views— in order to serve under the selfless lead- 
ership of John Galt!” 

Why are they listening?— thought Dagny. Don’t they see the hall- 
mark of death in those faces, and the hallmark of life in his? Which state 
do they wish to choose? Which stale do they seek for mankind? . . . 
She looked at the faces in the ballroom. They were nervously blank; 
they showed nothing but the sagging weight of lethargy and the 
staleness ot a chronic fear. They were looking at Galt and at Mouch, 
as il unahle to perceive any difference between them or to feel con- 
cern if a difference existed, their empty, uncritical, unvaluing stare 
declaring: "Who am 1 to know?” She shuddered, remembering his 
sentence: “The man who declares, ‘Who am I to know?' is declaring, 
‘Who am 1 to live?’ ” Did they care to live?— she thought. They did 
not seem to care even for the effort of raising that question. . . . She 
saw a few faces who seemed to care. They were looking at Galt with 
a desperate plea, with a wistfully tragic admiration — and with hands 
lying limply on the tables before them. These were the men who 
saw what he was, who lived in frustrated longing for his world— but 
tomorrow, if they saw him being muidered before them, their hands 
would hang as limply and their eyes would look away, saying, “Who 
am I to act?” 

“Unity of action and purpose,” said Mouch, “will bring us to a 
happier world. ..." 

Mr, 'Thompson leaned toward Gall and whispered with an amiable 
smite, “You’ll have to say a lew words to the country, later on, after 
me. No, no, not a long speech, just a sentence or two, no more. Just 
‘hello, folks’ or something like that, so they’ll recognize your voice,” 
The faintly stressed pressure of the “secretary's” muzzle against 
Galt’s side added a silent paragraph. Galt did not answer. 

“The John Galt Plan.” Wesley Mouch was saying, “will reconcile 
all conflicts. It will protect the property of the rich and give a greater 
share to the poor. It will cut down the burden of your taxes and provide 
you with more government benefits. It will lower prices and raise 
wages. It will give more freedom to the individual and strengthen 
the bonds of collective obligations. It will combine the efficiency ot 
free enterprise with the generosity of a planned economy. 

Dagny observed some faces — it took her an effort fully to believe 
il— who were looking at Galt with hatred. Jim was one of them, she 
noted. When the image of Mouch held the screen, these faces were 

1029 



relaxed in bored contentment, which was not pleasure, but the comfort 
of license, of knowing that nothing was demanded of them and nothing 
was lum or certain. When the camera flashed the image of Galt, their 
lips grew tight and their features were sharpened by a took of peculiar 
caution. She felt with sudden certainty that they feared the precision 
of his face, the unyielding clarity of his features, the look of being an 
entity, a look of asserting existence. They hate him for being himself — 
she thought, feeling a touch of cold horror, as the nature of their souls 
became real to her— they hate him for his capacity to live. Do they 
want to live? — she thought in self-mockery, lb rough the stunned numb- 
ness of her mind, she remembered the sound of his sentence: “The 
desire not to be anything, is the desire not to be.” 

It was now Mr. Thompson who was yelling into the microphone 
in his briskest and folksiest manner: “And 1 say to you: kick them 
in the teeth, all those doubters who’re spreading disunity and fear! 
They told you that John Galt would never join us, didn’t they? Well, 
here he is. in person, of his own free choice, at this table and at the 
head of our State! Ready, willing and able to serve the people’s 
cause! Don’t you ever again, any of you, start doubting or running 
or giving up! Tomorrow is here today — and what a tomorrow! With 
three meals a day for everyone on earth, with a car in every garage, 
and with electric power given free , produced by some sort of a motor 
the like of which we’ve never seen! And all you have to do is just 
be patient a little while longer! Patience, faith and unity — that's the 
recipe for progress! We must stand united among ourselves and 
united with the rest of the world, as a great big happy family, all 
working for the good of all! We have found a leader who will beat 
the record of our richest and busiest past! It’s his love for mankind 
that has made him come here — to serve you, protect you and take 
care of you! He has heard your picas and has answered the call of 
our common human duly! Every man is his brother’s keeper! No 
Tnan is an island unto himself! And now you will hear his voice — 
now you will hear his own message! . . . Ladies and gentlemen,” he 
said solemnly, “John Galt — to the collective family of mankind!” 

The camera moved to Galt. He remained still for a moment. Then, 
with so swift and expert a movement that his secretary’s hand was 
unable to match it, he rose to his feet, leaning sidewise, leaving the 
pointed gun momentarily exposed to the sight of the world — then, 
standing straight, facing the cameras, looking at all his invisible view- 
ers, he said: 

“Get the hell out of my way!” 

Chapter IX THE GENERATOR 

“Get the hell out of my way!” 

Dr. Robert Stadler heard it on the radio fn his car. He did not 
know whether the next sound, part-gasp, part-scream, part-laughter, 
started rising from him or from the radio — but he heard the dick 
that cut them both off. The radio went dead. No further sounds 
came from the Wayne-Falkland Hotel. 

1030 



He jerked his hand from knob to knob under the lighted dial. 
Nothing came through, no explanations, no pleas of technical trou- 
ble, no silence-hiding music. All stations were off the air. 

He shuddered, he gripped the wheel, leaning forward across it, 
like a jockey at the close of a race, and his foot pressed down on 
the accelerator. The small stretch of highway before him bounced 
with the leaping of his headlights. There was nothing beyond the 
lighted strip but the emptiness of the prairies of Iowa. 

He did not know why he had been listening to the broadcast: he 
did not know what made him tremble now. He chuckled abruptly— 
it sounded like a malevolent growl — either at the radio, or at those 
in the city, or at the sky. 

He was watching the rare posts of highway numbers. He did not 
need to consult a map: for four days, that map had been printed on 
his brain, like a net of lines traced in acid. They could not take it 
away from him, he thought, they could not stop him. He felt as if 
he were being pursued; but there was nothing for miles behind him, 
except the two red lights on the rear of his car — like two small signals 
of danger, fleeing through the darkness of the Iowa plains. 

The motive directing his hands and feet was four days behind him. 
It was the lace of the man on the window sill, and the faces he had 
confronted when he had escaped from that loom. He had cried to 
them that he could not deal with Galt and neither could they, that 
Gall would destroy them all, unless they destroyed him tirst. “Don’t 
get smart. Professor.” Mr. Thompson had answered coldly ‘You've 
done an awful lot of yelling about hating his guts, but when it comes 
to action, you haven’t helped us at all. I don’t know which side 
you're on. If he doesn't give in to us peaceably, we might have to 
resort to pressure— -such as hostages whom he wouldn’t want to see 
hurt — and you're first on the list, Professor.” l 7?” he had screamed, 
shaking with terror and with bitterly desperate laughter. “I? But he 
damns me more than anyone on earth!” “How do 1 know?” Mr. 
Thompson had answered. “I heard that you used to be his teacher. 
And, don’t forget, you’re the only one he asked for.” 

His mind liquid with terror, he had felt as if he were about to be 
crushed between two walls advancing upon him: he had no chance, 
if Galt refused to surrender -and less chance, if Galt joined these 
men. It was then that a distant shape had come swimming forward 
in his mind: the image of a mushroom-domed structure in the middle 
of an Iowa plain. 

All images had begun to fuse in his mind thereafter. Project X— 
he had thought, not knowing whether it was the vision of that struc- 
ture or of a feudal castle commanding the countryside, that gave him 
the sense of an age and a world to which he belonged . . . Pm 
Robert Stadler — he had thought — it's my property, it came from my 
discoveries, they said it was 1 who invented it. . . . Pll show them! — 
he had thought, not knowing whether he meant the man on the 
window sill or the others or the whole of mankind. . . . His thoughts 
had become like chips floating in a liquid, without connections: To 
seize control . . . VII show them! ... To seize control, to rule . . , 
There is no other way to live on earth. . . . 

1031 



These had been the only words that named the plan in his mind. 
He had felt that the rest was clear to him — clear in the form of a 
savage emotion crying defiantly that he did not have to make it clear. 
He would seize control of Project X and he would rule a part of the 
country as his private feudal domain. The means? His emotion had 
answered: Somehow. The motive? His mind had repeated insistently 
that his motive was terror of Mr. Thompson’s gang, that he was not 
safe among them any longer, that his plan was a practical necessity. 
In the depth of his liquid brain, his emotion had held another kind 
of terror, drowned along with the connections between his broken 
chips of words. 

These chips had been the only compass directing his course 
through four days and nights — while he drove down deserted high- 
ways, across a country collapsing into chaos, while he developed a 
monomaniac’s cunning for obtaining illegal purebrses of gas, while 
he snatched random hours of restless sleep, in obscure motels, under 
assumed names. . . . I’m Robert Stadler — he had thought, his mind 
repeating it as a formula of omnipotence. . . . To seize control — he 
had thought, speeding against the futile traffic lights of half-aban- 
doned towns — speeding on the vibrating steel of the Taggart Bridge 
across the Mississippi — speeding past the occasional ruins of farms 
in the empty stretches of Iowa. . . . I’ll show them —he had thought — 
let them pursue, they won’t stop me this time. ... He had thought 
it, even though no one had pursued him — as no one was pursuing 
him now, but the taillights of his own car and the motive drowned 
in his mind. 

He looked at his silent radio and chuckled: the chuckle had the 
emotional quality of a fist being shaken at space. It’s I who am 
practical — lie thought — 1 have no choice ... I have no other way . . . 
HI show all those insolent gangsters, who forget that I am Robert 
Stadler . . . They will all collapse, but 1 won't! . . . I’ll survive . . . 
HI win! . . . I’ll show them! 

The words were like chunks of solid ground in his mind, in the 
midst of a fiercely silent swamp; the connections lay submerged at 
the bottom. If connected, hts words would have formed the sentence: 
I’ll show him that there is no other way to live on earth! . . . 

The scattered lights in the distance ahead were the barracks 
erected on the site of Project X, now known as Harmony City. He 
observed, as he came closer, that something out of the ordinary was 
going on at Project X. The barbed-wire fence was broken, and no 
sentinels met him at the gate. But some sort of abnormal activity 
was churning in the patches of darkness and in the glare of some 
wavering spotlights: there were armored triicks and running figures 
and shouted orders and the gleam of bayonets. No one stopped his 
car. At the comer of a shanty, he saw the motionless body of a 
soldier sprawled on the ground. Drunk — |c thought, preferring to 
think it, wondering why he felt unsure of k . 

The mushroom structure crouched on at knoll before him; there 
were lights in the narrow slits of its windows— ^and the shapeless 
funnels protruded from under its dome, aimed at the darkness of 
the country. A soldier barred his way, when he alighted from his car 

1032 



it the entrance. The soldier was properly armed, but hatless and his 
miform seemed too sloppy. “Where are you going, bud?” he asked. 

“Let me in!” Dr. Stadler ordered contemptuously. 

“What’s your business here?” 

k Tm Or. Robert Stadler.” 

I m Joe Blow. I said, What s your business? Arc you one of the 
lew or one of the old?” 

“Let me in, you idiot! l‘m Or. Robert Stadler!” 

It was not the name, but the tone of the voice and the form of 
address that seemed to convince the soldier “One of the new,” he 
said and, opening the door, shouted to somebody inside, “Hey, Mac, 
L ake care of Cirandpaw here, see what he wants!” 

In the bare, dim hall of reinforced concrete, he was met by a man 
who might have been an officer, except that his tunic was open at 
the throat and a cigarette hung insolently in the corner of his mouth. 

“Who are vow?” he snapped, his hands jerking too swiftly to the 
holster on his hip, 

‘Tm Dr. Robert Stadler.” 

The name had no effect. “Who gave you permission to come 
here?” 

“I need no permission.” 

1 his seemed to have an effect; the man removed the cigarette 
from his mouth. “Who sent for you 0 ” he asked, a shade uncertainly. 

“Will you please let me speak to the commandant?” Dr. Stadler 
demanded impatiently. 

“The commandant? You’re too late, brother.” 

“The chiel engineer, then!” 

“The chief-who? Oh, Willie? Willie's. okay, he’s one ot us, but 
he’s out on an cnand just now.” 

There were other figures in the hall listening with an apprehensive 
curiosity. The officer’s hand summoned one of them to approach — 
an unshaved civilian with a shabby overcoat thrown over his shouL 
ders. “What do you want?” he snapped at Stadler 

“Would someone please tell me where are the gentlemen of the 
scientific staff?” Dr. Stadler asked in the courteously peremptory 
lone ot an order. 

The two men glanced at each other, as if such a question were 
irrelevant in this place. “Do you come from Washington?” the civil- 
ian asked suspiciously. 

“I do not. 1 will have you understand that I’m through with that 
Washington gang.” 

“Oh?” The man seemed pleased. “Are you a Friend ot the Peo- 
ple, then?” 

“I would say that I’m the best friend the people ever had. Tm the 
man who gave them all this.” He pointed around him. 

“You did?” said the man, impressed “Are you one of those who 
made a deal with the Boss?” 

"Tm the boss here, from now' on.” 

The men looked at each other, retreating a few steps, the officer 
asked, “Did you say the name was Stadler?” 

1033 



“ Robert Stadler \ And if you don’t know what that means, you’ll 
find out!” 

“Will you please follow me, sir?” said the officer, with shaky 
politeness. 

What happened next was not clear to Dr. Stadler, because his 
mind refused to admit the reality of the things he was seeing. There 
were shifting figures in half-lighted, disordered offices, there were 
too many firearms on everybody’s hips, there were senseless ques- 
tions asked of him by jerky voices that alternated between imperti- 
nence and fear. He did not know whether any of them tried to give 
him an explanation; he would not listen; he could not permit this to 
be true. He kept stating in the tone of a feudal sovereign, ‘Vm the 
boss here, from now on ... I give the orders ... 1 came to take 
over ... I own this place. ... I am Dr. Robert Stadler —and it you 
don’t know that name in this place, you have no business being here, 
you infernal idiots! You'll blow yourselves to pieces, it that's the 
state of your knowledge! Have you had a high -school course in phys- 
ics? You don’t look to me as if you’ve ever been allowed inside a 
high school, any of you! What are you doing here? Who arc you?” 

It took him a long time to grasp — when his mind could not block 
it any longer — that somebody had beaten him to his plan- somebody- 
had held the same view' of existence as his own anti had set out to 
achieve the same future. He grasped that these men, who called 
themselves the Friends of the People, had seized possession of Proj- 
ect X, tonight, a few hours ago, intending to establish a reign of then 
own. He laughed in their faces, with bitterly incredulous contempt 

‘’You don’t now what you’re doing, you miserable juvenile delin- 
quents! Do you think that you — you! — can handle a high-precision 
instrument of science? Who is your leader? I demand to see your 
leader!” 

It was his tone of overbearing authority, his contempt and their 
own panic — the blind panic of men of unbridled violence, who have 
no standards of safety or danger — that made them waver and wondei 
whether he was, perhaps, some secret top-level member of their lead- 
ership; they were equally ready to defy or obey any authority. After 
being shunted from one jittery commander to another, he found 
himself at last being led down iron stairways and down long, echoing, 
underground corridors of reinforced concrete to an audience with 
“The Boss” in person. 

The Boss had taken refuge in the underground control room. 
Among the complex spirals of the delicate scientific machinery that 
produced the sound ray, against the wall panel of glittering levers, 
dials and gauges, known as the Xylophone* Robert Stadler faced the 
new ruler of Project X. It was Cuffy Meig^, 

He wore a tight, semi-military tunic andjleather leggings; the flesh 
of his neck bulged over the edge of his cellar; his black curls were 
matted with sweat. He was pacing restlesfcly, unsteadily in front ot 
the Xylophone, shouting orders to men wtyo kept rushing in and out* 
of the room: 

“Send couriers to every county seat within our reach! Tell ’em 
that the Friends of the People have won! Tell ’em they’re not to 

1034 



take orders from Washington any longer! The new capital of the 
People’s Commonwealth is Harmony City, henceforth to be known 
as Meigsvillc! Tell ’em that I’ll expect live hundred thousand dollars 
per every five thousand heads of population, by tomorrow morning— 
or else!” & 

It took some time before Cufly Meigs’ attention and bleary brown 
eyes could be drawn to locus on the person of Dr. Stadler. “Well, 
what is it? What is it?” he snapped. 

“1 am Dr. Robert Stadler.” 

“Huh?— Oh, yeah! Yeah! You’re the big guy from outer spaces, 
aren’t you? You’re the fellow who catches atoms or something. Well’ 
what on earth are you doing here?” 

“U is I who should ask you that question.'' 

“Huh? Look, Professor, I’m in no mood for jokes.” 

“I have come here to lake control.” 

“Control? Of what?” 

“Of this equipment. Of this place. Of the countryside within its 
ladius of operation.” 

Meigs stared at him blankly for a moment, then asked softly, 
“How did you get here?” 

“By car ” 

“I mean, whom did you brine with you?” 

“Nobody.” 

“What weapons did you bring?” 

“None. My name is sufficient ” 

“You came here alone, with your name and your car?” 

“I did.” 

Cuffy Meigs burst out laughing in his face. 

“Do you think,” asked Dr. Stadler. “that you can operate an in- 
stallation ol this kind?” 

“Run along. Professor, run along! Beat it. before 1 have you shot! 
We've got no use for intellectuals around here!” 

“How much do you know about this'*" Dr. Stadler pointed at 
the Xylophone. 

“Who caies? Technicians are a dime a dozen these days! Beat it! 
T his ain’t Washington! I'm through with those impractical dreamers 
in Washington! They won't get anywhere, bargaining with that radio 
ghost and making speeches! Action— that’s what’s needed! Direct 
action! Beat it. Doc! Your day is over!” He was weaving unsteadily 
back and forth, catching at a lever of the Xylophone once in a while. 
Di. Stadler realized that Meigs was drunk. 

“Don’t touch those levers, you fool!” 

Meigs jerked his hand back involuntarily, then waved it defiantly 
at the panel *TU touch anything 1 please! Don’t vou tell me what 
to do!” 

“Get away from that panel! Get out of here! This is mine! Do 
you understand? It’s my property!” 

“Property? Huh!” Meigs gave a brief bark that was a chuckle. 

”1 invented it! 1 created it! I made it possible!” 

“You did? Well, many thanks. Doc. Many thanks, but we don’t 
need you any longer. We've got our own mechanics.” 

1035 



‘‘Have you any idea what I had to know in order to make it 
possible? You couldn’t think of a single tube of it! Not a single bolt!” 

Meigs shrugged. “Maybe not.” 

“Then how dare you think that you can own it? How dare you 
come here? What claim do you have to it?” 

Meigs patted his holster. “ This 

“Listen, you drunken lout!” cried Dr. Stadler. “Do you know what 
you’re playing with?” 

“Don’t you talk to me like that, you old fool! Who are you to 
talk to me like that? I can break your neck with my bate hands! 
Don’t you know who I am?” 

“You’re a scared thug way out of his depth!” 

“Oh, I am, am 1? I’m the Boss! I’m the Boss and I’m not going 
to be stopped by an old scarecrow like you! Get out of here!” 

They stood staring at each other for a moment, by the panel of 
the Xylophone, both cornered by terror. The unadmitted root of Dr. 
Stadler’s terror was his frantic struggle not to acknowledge that he 
was looking at his final product, that this was his spiritual son. Cutty 
Meigs’ terror had wider roots, it embraced all of existence; he had 
lived in chronic terror all his life, but now he was struggling not to 
acknowledge what it was that he had dreaded: in the moment of his 
triumph, when he expected to be safe, that mysterious, occult 
breed — the intellectual— was refusing to fear him and defying his 
power. 

“Get out of here'” snarled Cutty Meigs. “I'll call my men! I'll 
have you shot!” 

“Get out of here, you lousy, brainless, swaggering moron!” snarled 
Dr. Stadler. “Do you think I'll let you cash in on my life? Do you 
think it’s for you that I . . . that I sold—” He did not finish. “Stop 
touching those levels. God damn you!” 

“Don’t you give me orders! 1 don't need you to tell me what to 
do! You're not going to scare me with your classy mumbo-jumbo! 
HI do as I please! What did I fight for, if I can’t do as I please?” 
He chuckled and reached for a lever. 

“Hey. Cut'fy, take it easy!” yelled some figuic in the back of the 
room, darting forward. 

“Stand back!” roared Cully Meigs “Stand back, all of you! 
Scared, am I? I’ll show you who’s boss!” 

Dr, Stadler leaped to stop him — but Meigs shoved him aside with 
one arm, gave a gulp of laughter at the sight of Stadler falling to 
the floor, and, with the other arm, yanked a lever of the Xylophone. 

The crash of sound —the screeching crash of ripped metal and of 
pressures colliding on conflicting circuits, th£ sound of a monster 
turning upon itself — was heard only inside thje structure. No sound 
was heard outside. Outside, the structure merely rose into the air, 
suddenly and silently, cracked open into a jfew large pieces, shot 
some hissing streaks of blue light to the sky and came down as a 
pile of rubble. Within the circle of a radios of a hundred miles, 
enclosing parts of four states, telegraph potes fell like matchsticks, 
farmhouses collapsed into chips, city buildings went down as if 
slashed and minced by a single second’s blow, with no time for a 

1036 



sound Co be heard by the twisted bodies of the victims— and, on the 
circle s periphery, halfway across the Mississippi, the engine and the first 
six cars of a passenger train flew as a shower of metal into the water 
of the river, along with the western spans of the Taggart Bridge cut 
in half. & ’ 

On the site of what had once been Project X. nothing remained 
alive among the ruins — except, for some endless minutes longer, a 
huddle of torn flesh and screaming pain that had once been a 
great mind. 

+ * 

There was a sense of weightless freedom- thought Dagny -in the 
feeling that a telephone boolh was her only immediate, absolute 
goal, with no concern lor any ot the goals of the passers-by in the 
streets around her. It did not make her ted estranged from the city: 
it made her feel, for the first time, that she owned the city and that 
she loved it, that she had never loved it before as she did in this 
moment, with so personal, solemn and confident a sense of posses- 
sion, The night was still and clear; she looked at the sky; as her 
feeling was more solemn than joyous, but held the sense of a future 
joy — so the air was more windless than warm, but held the hint of 
a distant spring 

Get the hell out of my way — she thought, not with resentment, but 
almost with amusement, with a sense of detachment and deliverance, 
addressing it to the passers-by, to the traffic when it impeded her 
hurried progress, and to any fear she had known in the past. It was 
less than an hour ago that she had heard him utter that sentence, 
and his voice still seemed to ring in the air of the streets, merging 
into a distant hint of laughter 

She had laughed exultantly, in the ballroom of the Waync-Falkland, 
when she had heard him say it; she had laughed, her hand pressed 
to her mouth, so that the laughter was only in her eyes — and in his, 
when he had looked straight at her and she had known that he heard 
it. They had looked at each other for the span of a second, above 
the heads of the gasping, screaming crowd — above the crash of the 
microphones being shattered, though all stations had been instantly 
cut off — above the bursts of breaking glass on falling tables, as some 
people were stampeding to the doors. 

Then she had heard Mr. Thompson cry, waving his arm at Galt, 
“Take him back to his room, but guard him with your lives!”-- and 
the crowd had parted as three men led him out. Mr. Thompson 
seemed Co collapse for a moment, dropping his forehead on his arm, 
but he rallied, jumped to his feet, waved vaguely at hts henchmen 
to follow and rushed out, through a private side exit. No one ad- 
dressed or instructed the guests: some were running blindly to es- 
cape, others sat still, not daring to move. The ballroom was like a 
ship without a captain. She cut through the crowd and followed the 
clique. No one tried to stop her. 

She found them huddled in a small private study; Mr. Thompson 
was slumped in an armchair, clutching his head with both hands, 
Wesley Mouch was moaning, Eugene Lawson was sobbing with the 
sound of a nasty child’s rage, Jim was watching the others with an 

1037 



oddly expectant intensity. “I told you so!” Dr. Ferris was shouting. 
“I told you so, didn’t l? That’s where you get with your ‘peaceful 
persuasion’!” 

She remained standing by the door. They seemed to notice her 
presence, but they did not seem to care. 

“I resign!” yelled ( hick Morrison, “I resign! I’m through! 1 don't 
know what to say to the country! I can’t think! I won’t try! It’s no 
use! I couldn’t help it! You’re not going to blame me! I’ve resigned!” 
He waved his arms in some shapeless gesture of futility or farewell, 
and ran out of the room. 

“He has a hide-out all stocked for himself in Tennessee,” said 
Tinky Holloway reflectively, as if he, too, had taken a similar precau- 
tion and were now wondering whether the time had come. 

“He won't keep it for long, if he gets there at all,” said Mouch. 
“With the gangs of raiders and the state of transportation — ” He 
spread his hands and did not finish. 

She knew what thoughts were filling the pause: she knew that 
no matter what private escapes these men had once provided for 
themselves, they were now grasping the fact that all of them were 
trapped. 

She observed that there was no terror in their faces; she saw hints 
of it, but it looked like a perfunctory terror Their expressions ranged 
from blank apathy to the relieved look of cheats who had believed 
that the game could end no other way and were making no effort 
to contest it or regret it — to the petulant blindness of Lawson, who 
refused to be conscious of anything — to the peculiar intensity of Jim, 
whose face suggested a secret MTiile. 

“Well? Well?” Dr. Ferris was asking impatiently, with the crack- 
ling energy of a man who feels at home in a world of hysteria. “What 
. are you now going to do with him? Argue? Debate? Make speeches?" 

No one answered. 

“He . . . has , . . to . . . save . . . us,” said Mouch slowly, as it 
straining the last of his mind into blankness and delivering an ultima- 
tum to reality. “He has to . . . take over . . . and save the system." 

“Why don’t you write him a love letter about it?” said F’crris. 

“We’ve got to . . . make him . . . take over . . . We’ve got to force 
him to rule,” said Mouch in the lone of a sleepwalker. 

“;Vok\” said Ferris, suddenly dropping his voice, “do you see what 
a valuable establishment the State Science Institute really is?” 

Mouch did not answer him, but she observed lhat they all seemed 
to know what he meant. * 

“You objected to that private research prelect of mine as ‘imprac- 
tical? ” said Ferris softly. “But what did 1 t0ll you?” 

Mouch did not answer; he was cracking his knuckles. 

“This is no time for squeamishness,” James Taggart spoke up with 
unexpected vigor, but his voice, too, was od<Jly low. “We don’t have 
to be sissies about it.” 

“It seems to me . . said Mouch dully, "that . . . that the end 
justifies the means . . 


1038 



-It'S too late for any scruples or any principles,’' said Ferris. <l Only 
direct action can work now.” 

No one answered; they were acting as if they wished that their 
pauses, not their words, would state what they were discussing. 

“It won’t work,” said Tinky Holloway “He won't give in.” 

“That’s what you think!” said Ferris, and chuckled. “You haven’t 
seen our experimental model in action. Last month, we got three 
confessions in three unsolved murder cases.” 

“If ...” started Mr. Thompson, and his voice cracked suddenly 
into a moan, “if he dies, we all perish!” 

“Don’t worry.” said Ferris. “He won't. The Ferris Persuader is 
safely calculated against that possibility.” 

Mr. Thompson did not answer. 

“It .seems to me . . . that we have no other choice . . .” said 
Mouch; it was almost a whisper 

They remained silent, Mr. Thompson was struggling not to see 
that they were all looking at him. Then he cried suddenly, “Oh, do 
anything you want! I couldn't help it! Do anything you want!” 

Dr. Ferris turned to Lawson. “Gene.” he said tensely, still whisper- 
ing. “run to the radio-control office. Order all stations to stand by. 
Tell them that I’ll have Mi. Galt on the air within three hours.” 

Lawson leaped to his feet, with a sudden, mirthful grin, and ran 


out of the room. . . 

She knew. She knew what they intended doing and what it was 
within them that made it possible. Ihev did not think that this would 
succeed They did not think that Galt would give in; they did not 
want him to give in. They did not think that anything could save 
them now; they did not want to be saved. Moved by the panic of 
their nameless emotions, they had fought agamst reality all their 
lives— and now they had reached a moment when at last they felt 
at home. They did not have to know why they felt it, they who had 
chosen never to know what they felt— they merely experienced a 
sense of recognition, since this was what they had been seeking, to 
was the kind of reality that had been implied m all of 
their actions, their desires, their choices, their dreams. 1 his was the 
nature and the method of the rebellion agamst eme and of th, 
undefined quest for an unnamed Nirvana, lhey did not want to live, 

,St K oniv . W ..*■ «* .!>» ««* 

switching perspective, she grasped that the objects she had ^though 
to be human were not. She was left with a sense o danty ofa tirnd 
answer and of the need to act. He was m danger; there was no Me 
and no room in her consciousness to waste emotion on the actions 

01 -We'mustmTke sure,” Wesley Mouch was whispering, “that no- 

S Virik'' their voices had the cautious drone of 
conspirators. 4 s a secret, separate unit on the Inst. - 

Sound-proofed and safely distant from the rest . - • Only a very tew 
of our staff have ever entered it. . • • 


1039 



“If we were to fly — ” said Mouch, and stopped abruptly, as if he 
had caught some warning in Ferris' face. 

She saw Ferris' eyes move to her, as if he had suddenly remem - 
hered her presence. She held his glance, letting him see the untrou- 
bled indifference of hers, as if she had neither cared nor understood. 
Then, as if merely grasping the signal of a private discussion, she 
turned slowly, with the suggestion of a shrug, and left the room. She 
knew that they were now past the stage of worrying about her. 

She walked with the same unhurried indifference through the halls 
and through the exit of the hotel. But a block away, when she had 
turned a corner, her head flew up and the folds of her evening gown 
slammed like a sail against her legs with the sudden violence of the 
speed of her steps. 

And now, as she rushed through the darkness, thinking only of 
finding a telephone booth, she felt a new sensation rising irresistibly 
within her, past the immediate tension of danger and concern: it was 
the sense of freedom of a world that had never had to he obstructed. 

She saw the wedge of light on the sidewalk, that came from the 
window of a bar. No one gave her a second glance, as she crossed 
the half-deserted room: the few customers were still waiting and 
whispering tensely in front of the crackling blue void of an empty 
television screen. 

Standing in the tight space of the telephone booth, as in the cabin 
of a ship about to take off for a different planet, she dialed the 
number OR 6-5693. 

The voice that answered at once was Francisco’s. “Hello? 5 ’ 

“Francisco?” 

“Hello, Dagny. I was expecting you to call.” 

‘Did you hear the broadcast?” 

“I did.” 

“They are now planning to force him to give in.” She kept her 
voice to the tone of a factual report. “They intend to torture him. 
They have some machine called the Ferris Persuader, in an isolated 
unit on the grounds of the State Science Institute. It’s in New Hamp- 
shire. They mentioned flying. They mentioned that they would have 
him on the radio within three hours.” 

“1 see. Are you calling from a public phone booth?” 

“Yes.” 

“You’re still in evening clothes, aren’t you?” 

“Yes.” 

“Now listen carefully. Go home, change your clothes, pack a few 
things you’ll need, take your jewelry and any valuables that you can 
carry, take some warm clothing. Wc won't lave time to do it later. 
Meet me in forty minutes, on the northwest! corner, two blocks east 
of the main entrance of the Taggart Termir^ 1 ” 

“Right” 

“So long. Slug.” 

“So long, Frisco.” 

She was in the bedroom of her apartment, in less than five minutes, 
tearing off her evening gown. She left it lying in the middle of the 
floor, Tike the discarded uniform of an army she was not serving any 

1040 



longer. She put on a dark blue suit and— remembering Galt's words— 
a white, high-collared sweater. She packed a suitcase and a bag with 
a strap that she could carry swung over her shoulder. She put her 
jewelry in a corner of the bag, including the bracelet of Rearden 
Metal she had earned in the outside world, and the five-dollar gold 
piece she had earned in the valley. 

It was easy to leave the apartment and to lock the door, even 
though she knew she would probably never open it again. It seemed 
harder, for a moment, when she came to her office. No one had seen 
her come in; the anteroom of her office was empty; the great Taggart 
Building seemed unusually quiet. She stood looking for a moment at 
this room and at all the years it had contained. Then she smiled— no, 
it was not too hard, she thought; she opened her safe and took the 
documents she had come here to get. I here was nothing else that 
she wanted to take from her office — except the picture of Nathaniel 
Taggart and the map of Taggart Transcontinental. She broke the 
two frames, folded the picture and the map, and slipped them into 
her suitcase. 

She was locking the suitcase, when she heard the sound of hurrying 
steps. The door (lew open and the chief engineer lushed in; he was 
shaking; his face was distorted. 

“Miss Taggart!” he cried, “Oh, thank God, Miss laggart. you're 
here! We’ve been calling lot you all over!” 

.She did not answer; she looked at him inquiringly. 

“Miss Taggart, have you heard *” 

“What?” 

“Then you haven’t! Oh God. Miss laggait, it’s . I can’t believe 
it, 1 still can't believe it, but . . . Oh God, what are wc going to do? 
The ... the Taggart Bridge is gone*” 

She stated at him, unable to move. 

“It’s gone! Blown up! Blown up, apparently, in one second! No- 
body knows for ceitain what happened— but it looks like . , they 

think that something went wrong at Project X and ... it looks like 
those sound rays. Miss Taggart! Wc can’t get through to any point 
within a radius of a hundred miles’ It’s not possible, it can’t be 
possible, but it looks as if everything in that circle has been wiped 
out! . . . We can’t get any answers! Nobody can get an answer- -the 
newspapers, the radio stations, the police! We’re still checking, but 
the stories that are coming from the rim of that circle arc—” He 
shuddered. “Only one thing is certain: the bridge is gone! Miss Tag- 
gart! We don’t know what to do!” 

She leaped to her desk and seized the telephone receiver. Her 
hand stopped in mid-air. Then, slowly, twistedly, with the greatest 
effort ever demanded of her. she began to move her arm down to 
place the receiver back. It seemed to her that it took a long time, 
as if her arm had to move against some atmospheric pressure that 
no human body could combat— and in the span of these few brief 
moments, in the stillness of a blinding pain, she knew what Francisco 
had felt, that night, twelve years ago — and what a boy of twenty-six 
had felt when he had looked at his motor for the last time. 

1041 



“Miss Taggart!” cried the chief engineer, “We don’t know what 
to do!’ 

The receiver clicked softly back into its cradle. “I don't, either,” 
she answered. 

In a moment, she knew it was over: She heard her voice telling 
the man to check further and report to her later — and she waited 
for the sound of his steps to vanish in the echoing silence of the hall. 

Crossing the concourse of the Terminal for the last time, she 
glanced at the statue of Nathaniel Taggart — and remembered a 
promise she had made. It would be only a symbol now, she thought, 
but it would be the kind of farewell that Nathaniel Taggart deserved. 
She had no other writing instrument, so she took the lipstick from 
her bag and, smiling up at the marble face of the man who would 
have understood, she drew a large sign of the dollar on the pedestal 
under his feel. 

She was first to reach the corner, two blocks east of the Terminal 
entrance. As she waited, she observed the first trickles of the panic 
that was soon to engult the city: there were automobiles driving too 
fast, some of them loaded with household effects, there were too 
many police cars speeding by, and too many sirens bursting in the 
distance. The news of the destruction of the Bridge was apparently 
spreading through the city; they would know that the city was 
doomed and they would start a stampede to escape— but they had 
no place to go, and it was not her concern any longer. 

She saw Francisco's figure approaching from some distance away; 
she recognized the swiftness of his walk, before she could distinguish 
the face under the cap pulled low over his eyes. She caught the 
•moment when he saw her, as he came closer. He waved his arm, 
with a smile of greeting. Some conscious stress in the sweep of his 
arm made it the gesture of a d’Anconia, welcoming the arrival of a 
long-awaited traveler at the gates of his own domain. 

When he approached, she stood solemnly straight and. looking at 
his face and at the buildings of the greatest city in the world, as at 
the kind of witnesses she wanted, she said slowly, her voice confident 
and steady: 

“1 swear — by my life and my lovt of it — that 1 will never live for 
the sake of another man, nor ask another man to live for mine.” 

He inclined his head, as if in sign of admittance. His smile was 
now a salute. 

Then he took her suitcase with one hand, her arm with the other, 
and said, “Come on.” 

* * 

The unit known as “Project F” — in honor of its originator. Dr. 
Ferris — was a small structure of reinforced concrete, low on the slope 
of the hill that supported the State Science Institute on a higher, 
more public level Only the small gray patc£ of the unit’s roof could 
be seen from the Institute’s windows, hidden in a jungle of ancient 
trees; it looked no bigger than the cover of a manhole. 

The unit consisted of two stories in th<$ shape of a small cube 
placed asymmetrically on top of a larger one. The first story had no 
windows, only a door studded with iron spikes; the second story had 

1042 



but one window, as if in reluctant concession to daylight like a face 
with a single eye. The men on the staff of the Institute felt no curios- 
ity about that structure and avoided the paths that led down to its 
door; nobody had ever suggested it, but they had the impression that 
the structure housed a project devoted to experiments with the germs 
of deadly diseases. & 

The two floors were occupied by laboratories that contained a 
great many cages with guinea pigs, dogs and rats. But the heart and 
meaning of the structure was a room in its cellar, deep under the 
ground; the room had been incompetently lined with the porous 
sheets of sound-proofing material; the sheets had begun to crack and 
the naked rock of a cave showed through. 

The unit was always protected by a squad of four special guards. 
Tonight, the squad had been augmented to sixteen, summoned for 
emergency duty by a long-distance telephone call from New York. 
Hie guards, as well as all other employees of “Project F.” had been 
carefully chosen on the basis ot a single qualification: an unlimited 
capacity tor obedience. 

The sixteen were stationed tor the night outside the structure and 
in the deserted laboratories above the ground, where they remained 
uncritically on duty, with no cunosily about anything that might be 
taking place below. 

In the cellar room, undei the giound. Dr. Ferris, Wesley Mouch 
and James Taggart sat in armchairs lined up against one wall. A 
machine that looked like a small cabinet ot irregular shape st<xid m 
a corner across from them. Its face bore rows ol glass dials, each 
dial marked by a segment of red, a squaie screen that looked like 
an amplifier, rows of numbers, rows of wooden knobs and plastic 
buttons, a single lever controlling a switch at one side and a single 
icd glass button at the other. The lace of the machine seemed to 
have more expression than the face ot the mechanic in charge of it; 
he was a husky young man in a sweat- stained shirt with sleeves rolled 
above the elbows; his pale blue eyes were gla/ed by an enormously 
conscientious concentration on his task; he moved his lips once in a 
while, as if reciting a memorised lesson. 

A short wire led from the machine to an electric storage battery 
behind it. Long coils of wire, like the twisted arms of an octopus, 
stretched forward across the stone flooi, from the machine to a 
leather mattress spread under a cone of violent light. John Galt lay 
strapped to the mattress. He was naked; the small metal disks of 
electrodes at the ends of the wires were attached to his wrists, his 
shoulders, his hips and his ankles; a device resembling a stethoscope 
was attached to his chest and connected to the amplifier. 

“Get this straight,” said Dr. Ferris, addressing him for the first 
time. **We want you to take full power over the economy of the 
country. We want you to become a dictator. We want you to rule, 
f 'nderstand? Wo want you to give orders and to figure out the right 
orders to give. What we want, we mean to get. Speeches, logic, argu- 
ments or passive obedience won’t save you now. We want ideas 
<>r else. We won’t let you out of here until you tell us the exact 
measures you'll take to save our system. Then well have you tell it 

1043 



to the country over the radio.’' He raised his wrist, displaying a stop- 
watch ‘TH give you thirty seconds to decide whether you want to 
start talking right now If not, then well start Do you understand?” 

Galt was looking straight at them, his face expressionless, as if he 
understood too much He did not answer 
They heard the sound of the stop-watch in the silence, counting off 
the seconds, and the sound of Mouch's choked, irregular breathing as 
he gripped the arms ot his chair 

Ferris waved a signal to the mechanic al the machine The me- 
chanic threw the switch, it lighted the red glass button and set off two 
sounds one was the low, humming drone of an electric generator, the 
other was a peculiar beat as regular as the ticking of a clock, but 
with an oddly muffled resonance It took them a moment to realize 
that it came from the amplifier and that they were hearing the beat 
of Galt's heart 

“Number three ” said Ferns, raising a finger in signal 
Hie mechanic pressed a button under one of the dials A long 
shudder ran through Galt’s body, his left arm shook m jerking 
spasms, convulsed by the electnc current that circled between lus 
wrist and shoulder His head fell back, his eyes closed, his lips drawn 
tight He made no sound 

When the mechanic lilted his finger oft the button, Galt’s arm 
stopped shaking He did not move 

Hie three men glanced about them with an instant’s look of grop 
mg Ferns eyes were blank Mouch\ terrified faggarts disap 
pointed The sound ot the thumping beat went on through the 
silence 

“Number two,’ said Ferris 

It was Galt’s light leg that twisted in convulsions with the current 
now circling between his hips and ankle His hands gnpped the edges 
of the mattiess His head jeikcd once, fiom side to side then lay 
still The beating of the heart grew faintly faster 

Mouth was drawing away pressing against the back of his arm 
chair Taggail was sitting on the edge of his leaning forward 
“Number one gradual, ’ said Ferns 

Galt’s torso jerked upward and fell back and twisted in long shud 
ders, straining against his strapped wrists — as the cuircnt was now 
running from his one wrist to the other across his lungs The me 
chanic was slowlv turning a knob, increasing the voltage of the cur 
rent, the needle on the dial was moving toward the red segment that 
marked danger Galt’s breath was coming m broken, panting sounds 
out of convulsed lungs 

‘Had enough snarled Ferns, when the cunent went off 
Galt did not answer His lips moved faintly, opening for air The 
beat from the stethoscope was racing But |n\ breath was falling to 
an even rhythm, by a controlled effort at relaxation 
“You’re too easy on him*” yelled Taggart, staring at the naked 
body on the mattress 

Gall opened his eyes and glanced at them tor a moment They 
could tell nothing except that his glance was steady and fully con- 

1044 



stious. Then he dropped his head again and lay still, as if he had 
forgotten them. 

His naked body looked strangely out of place in this cellar. They 
knew it, though none of them would identify that knowledge. The 
long lines of his body, running from his ankles to the flat hips to 
the angle of the waist, to the straight shoulders, looked like a statue 
of ancient Greece, sharing that statue’s meaning, but stylized to a 
longer, lighter, more active form and a gaunter strength, suggesting 
more restless an energy— the body, not of a chariot driver, but of a 
builder of airplanes. And as the meaning of a statue of ancient 
Greece — the statue of man as a god— clashed with the spirit of this 
century’s halls, so his body clashed with a cellar devoted to prehistorical 
activities, 'lbe dash was the gi eater, because he seemed to belong with 
electric wires, with stainless steel, with precision instruments, with the 
levers of a control board Perhaps- this was the thought most fiercely 
resisted and most deeply buried at the bottom of his watchers’ sensa- 
tions. the thought they knew only as a diffused hatred and an unfo- 
cused terror— perhaps it was the absence ol such statues from the 
modern world that had transformed a generator into an octopus and 
brought a body such as his into its tentacles 

“1 understand you’re some sort oi electrical expert,” said Ferris, 
and chuckled. “So are we- don’t you think so?” 

Two sounds answered him in the silence: the drone of the genera- 
tor and the beating of Galt’s heart 

“The mixed scries!” ordered Ferris, waving one linger at the 
mechanic. 

The shocks now came at irregular, unpredictable inteivals. one 
after another or minutes apart. Only the shuddering convulsions of 
Galt’s legs, arms, torso or entire body showed whether the current 
was racing between two particular electrodes or through all of them 
at once. The needles on the dials kept coming dose to the red marks, 
then receding: the machine was calculated to inflict the maximum 
intensity of pain without damaging the body ol the victim. 

It was the watchers who found it unbearable to wait through the 
minutes of the pauses filled with the sound ol the heartbeat: the heart 
was now racing in an irregular rhythm. The pauses were calculated to 
let that beat slow down, but allow no relief to the victim, who had 
to wait for a shock at any moment. 

Galt lay relaxed, as if not attempting to light the pain, but surren- 
dering to it, not attempting to negate it, but to bear it. When bis 
lips parted for breath and a sudden jolt slammed them tight again, 
he did not resist the shaking rigidity of his body, but he let it vanish 
the instant the current left him. Only the skin ol his face was pulled 
tight, and the sealed line of his lips twisted sidewise once in a while. 
When a shock raced through his chest, the gold-copper strands of 
his hair flew with the jerking of his head, as if waving in a gust of 
wind, beating against his face, across his eyes. The watchers won- 
dered why his hair seemed to be growing darker, until they realized 
that it was drenched in sweat. 

The terror of hearing one’s own heart struggling as if about to 
burst at any moment, had been intended to be felt by the victim. It 

1045 



was (he torturers who were trembling with terror, as they listened 
to the jagged, broken rhythm and missed a breath with every missing 
beat. It sounded now as if the heart were leaping, beating frantically 
against its cage of ribs, in agony and in a desperate anger. The heart 
was protesting; the man would not. He lay still, his eyes closed, his 
hands relaxed, hearing his heart as it fought for his life. 

Wesley Mouch was first to break. “Oh God, Floyd!'’ he screamed. 
‘’Don't kill him! Don’t dare kill him! If he dies, we die!'’ 

“He won’t,” snarled Ferris. “He’ll wish he did, but he won’t! The 
machine won’t let him! It's mathematically computed! It’s sale!” 

“Oh, isn’t it enough? He’ll obey us now! Fm sure he'll obey!” 

“No! It’s not enough! I don’t want him to obey! I want him to 
believe*. To accept! To want to accept! We’ve got to have him work 
for us voluntarily !” 

“Go ahead!” cried Taggart “What are you waiting for? Can't you 
make the current stronger? He hasn’t even screamed yet!” 

“What’s the matter with you?" gasped Mouch, catching a glimpse 
of Taggart’s face while a cui rent was twisting Galt's body: Taggart 
was staring at it intently, yet his eyes seemed glazed and dead, but 
around that inanimate stare the muscles of his face were pulled into 
an obscene caricature of enjoyment. 

“Had enough?” Ferns kept yelling to Galt. “Are you ready to 
want what we want?” 

They heard no answer. Galt raised his head once in a while and 
looked at them. There were dark rings under his eyes, but the eves 
were clear and conscious. 

In mounting panic, the watchers lost their sense of context ami 
language — and their three voices blended into a progression of indis- 
criminate shrieks: “We want you to take over! . . . We want you to 
/ule! . . . We order you to give orders! . . . We demand that you 
dictate! , . . We order you to save us! . . We order you to think! . . 

They heard no answer but the beating of the heart on which their 
own lives depended. 

The current was shooting through Galt’s chest and the beating was 
coming in irregular spurts, as if it were racing and stumbling- -when 
suddenly his body fell still, relaxing: the beating had stopped. 

The silence was like a stunning blow, and before they had time to 
scream, their horror was topped by another: by the fact that Galt 
opened his eyes and raised his head. 

Then they realized that the drone ot the motor had ceased, too, 
and that the red light had gone out on the control panel: the current 
had slopped: the generator was dead. 

The mechanic was jabbing his finger at the button to no avail. He 
yanked the lever of the switch again and again! He kicked the side of 
the machine. The red light would not go on; thfe sound did not return 

“Well?” snapped Ferris. “Well? What’s th$ matter?” 

“The generator's on the blink,” said the mechanic helplessly. 

“What’s the matter with it?” 

“1 don’t know.” 

”WcH, find out and fix it!” 

The man was not a trained electrician; he had been chosen, not 

1046 



for his knowledge, but for his uncritical capacity for pushing any 
buttons; the effort he needed to learn his task was such that his 
consciousness could be relied upon to have no room for anything 
else. He opened the rear panel of the machine and stared in bewil- 
derment at the intricate coils: he could find nothing visibly out ol 
order. He put on his rubber gloves, picked up a pair of pliers, tight- 
ened a few bolts at random, and scratched his head. 

I don t know', he said; his voice had a sound of helpless docility. 
“Who am 1 to know?” 

The three men were on their feet, crowding behind the machine 
to stare at its recalcitrant oigans. They were acting merely by reflex: 
they knew that they did not know. 

“Bui you’ve got to tix il»” yelled Perris. ‘It's got to work! We’ve 
got to have electricity 1 ” 

“We must continue!” cried Taggart, he was shaking. “It’s ridicu- 
lous! 1 won’t have it! I won’t be interrupted! I won’t" let him off” 
He pointed in the direction of the mattress. 

“Do something!” Penis was crying to the mechanic “Don't just 
stand there! Do something! Fix it! 1 order you to fix it!” 

“But l don’t know what’s wrong with it.” said the man, blinking. 

“Then tind out!" 

“How am l to find out ” 

“1 order you to fix it! Do you heat me ? Make it work -or i’ll tire 
you and throw you in jail!” 

“But 1 don't know what’s wrong with it.” The man sighed, bewil- 
dered, T don’t know what to do.” 

It’s the vibratoi that’s out of order,” said a voice behind them; 
they whirled around; Galt was struggling tor breath, but he was 
speaking in the brusque, competent tone ot an engineer, ‘lake it 
out and pry ofl the aluminum cover. You'll find a pair ot contacts 
fused together. Force them apart, take a small file and dean up the 
pitted surfaces Then replace the cover, plug it back into the ma- 
chine- -and your generatoi will work ” 

There was a long moment of total silence. 

The mechanic was staring at Galt, he was holding Galt’s glance — 
and even he was able to recognize the nature of the sparkle in the 
dark green eyes: it was a sparkle of contemptuous mockery. 

He made a step back. In the incoherent dimness of his conscious- 
ness, in some wordless, shapeless, unintelligible manner, even he sud- 
denly grasped the meaning ot what was occurring in that cellar. 

He looked at Galt -ho looked at the three men— he looked at 
the machine. He shuddered, he dropped his pliers and ran out of 
the room. 

Galt burst out laughing. 

The three men were backing slowly away from the machine. They 
were struggling not to allow themselves to understand what the me- 
chanic had understood. 

“No!” cried Taggart suddenly, glancing at Galt and leaping for- 
ward, “No! I won't let him get away with it!” He fell down on his 
knees, groping frantically to find the aluminum cylinder of the vibra- 

1047 



tor. ‘77/ fix it! I’ll work it myself! We’ve got to go on! We’ve got 
to break him!” 

“Take it easy, Jim,” said Ferris uneasily, jerking him up to his feet. 

“Hadn’t we . , . hadn’t we better lay off for the night?” said 
Mouch pleadingly; he was looking at the door through which the 
mechanic had escaped, his glance part-envy, part-terror. 

“No!” cried Taggart. 

“Jim, hasn’t he had enough? Don’t forget, we have to be careful,” 

“No! He hasn't had enough! He hasn’t even screamed yet!” 

“Jim!” cried Mouch suddenly, terrified by something in Taggart’s 
face. “We can’t afford to kill him! You know it!” 

“I don’t care! I want to break him! I want to hear him scream! 1 
want — ” 

And then it was Taggart who screamed. It was a long, sudden, 
piercing scream, as if at some sudden sight, though his eyes were 
staring at space and seemed blankly sightless. The sight he was con- 
fronting was within him. The protective walls of emotion, of evasion, 
of pretense, of semi-thinking and pseudo-words, built up by him 
through all of his years, had crashed in the span of one moment — 
the moment when he knew that he wanted Galt to die, knowing 
fully that his own death would follow'. 

He was suddenly seeing the motive that had directed all the actions 
of his life. It was not his incommunicable soul or his love for others 
or his social duty or any of the fraudulent sounds by which he had 
maintained his self-esteem: it was the lust to destroy whatever was 
living, for the sake of whatever was not. It was the urge to defy 
reality by the destruction of every living value, for the sake of prov- 
ing to himself that he could exist in defiance of reality and would 
never have to be bound by any solid, immutable facts. A moment 
.ago, he had been able to feel that he hated Galt above all men, that 
the hatred was proof of Galt’s evil, which he need define no further, 
that he wanted Galt to be destroyed for the sake of his own survival. 
Now he knew that he had wanted Galt’s destruction at the price of 
his own destruction to follow, he knew that he had never wanted to 
survive, he knew that it was Galt’s greatness he had wanted to torture 
and destroy — he was seeing it as greatness by his own admission, 
greatness by the only standard that existed, whether anyone chose 
to admit it or not: the greatness of a man who was master of reality 
in a manner no other had equaled. In the moment when he, James 
Taggart, had found himself facing the ultimatum: to accept reality 
or die, it was death his emotions had chosen, death, rather than 
surrender to that realm of which Galt was so radiant a son. In the 
person of Galt — he knew — he had sought fhe destruction of all 
existence. 

It was not by means of words that his knowledge confronted his 
consciousness: as all his knowledge had consisted of emotions, so 
now he was held by an emotion and a vision That he had no power 
to dispel. He was no longer able to summon the fog to conceal the 
sight of all those blind alleys he had struggled never to be forced to 
See: now, at the end of every alley, he was seeing his hatred of 
existence — he was seeing the face of Cherry 1 Taggart with her joyous 

1048 



eagerness to live and that it was this particular eagerness he bad 
always wanted to defeat-he was seeing his face af the face of a 
killer whom ail men should rightfully loathe, who destroyed values 

deemable Wh ° td m ortlcr not to discover his own irre- 

esca^e it ‘•No'', S ‘? nng a ‘ thal vision ' shakin 8 hi ® head to 

“Yes,” said Galt. 


. He . saw p al, ’ s e y° s lo «kin S straight at his, as if Galt were seeing 
the things he was seeing, e 

“I told you that on the Tadio, didn't 1?” said Galt. 

This was the stamp Janies Taggart had dreaded, from which there 
was no escape: the stamp and proof of objectivity "No ” he said 
feebly once more, but it was no longer the voice of a living con- 
sciousness. 

He stood for a moment, staring blindlv at space, then his legs gave 
way, folding limply, and he sat on the floor, still staring, unaware of 
his action or surroundings. 

“Jim . . . !” called Mouch. There was no answer. 

Mouch and Ferris did not ask themselves or wonder what it was 
that had happened to Taggart: they knew that they must never at- 
tempt to discover it, under peril of sharing his fate. They knew who 
it was thal had been broken tonight. T hey knew' thal this was the 
end of James Taggart, whether his physical body survived or not. 

“Let's . let's get Jim out of here." said Fe r ris shakily. “Let's 
get him to a doctor ... or somewhere 

They pulled Taggart to his feet: he did not resist, he obeyed lethar- 
gically, and he moved his feet when pushed. It was he who had 
reached the state to which he had wanted Galt to be reduced. Hold- 
ing his arms at both sides, his two friends led him out of the room. 

He saved them from the necessity of admitting to themselves that 
they wanted to escape Galt's eyes. Galt was watching them; his 
glance was too austerely perceptive. 

“We ll be back," snapped Ferris to the chief of the guards. “Stay 
here and don’t let anyone in. Understand? No one." 

They pushed Taggart into their car, parked by the trees at the 
entrance. “We 11 be back," said Ferris to no one in particular, to the 
trees and the darkness of the sky. 

For the moment, their only certainty was that they had to escape 
from that cellar— the cellar where the living generator was left tied 
by the side of the dead one. 


Chapter X IN THE NAME OF THE BEST WITHIN US 

Oagny walked straight toward the guard who stood at the door of 
“Project F." Her steps sounded purposeful, even and open, ringing 
in the silence of the path among the trees. She raised her head to a 
ray of moonlight, to let him recognize her face. 

“Let me in?’ she said. 


1049 



“No admittance.” he answered in the voice of a robot. ‘*By order 
of Dr. Ferris.” 

i am here by order of Mr. Thompson.” 

“Huh? ... I ... I don’t know about that.” 

“I do.” 

“I mean. Dr. Ferris hasn't told me . . . ma’am.” 

‘7 am telling you.” 

“But Fm not supposed to take any orders from anyone excepting 
Dr. Ferns.” 

“Do you wish to disobey Mr, Thompson?” 

“Oh, no. ma’am! But . . . but if Dr. Ferris said to let nobody in, 
that means nobody — ” He added uncertainly and pleadingly, “ — doesn’t 
it?” 

“Do you know that 1 am Dagny Taggart and that you’ve seen my 
pictures in the papers with Mr. Thompson and all the top leaders of 
the country?” 

“Yes, ma’am.” 

“Then decide whether you wish to disobey their orders.” 

“Oh, no, ma’am! I don't’” 

“Then let me in ” 

“Bui i can’t disobey Dr. Ferris, either!” 

“Then choose.” 

“But 1 can’t ch<x>se, ma’am! Who am I to choose 

“You’ll have to ” 

“Look.” he said hastily, pulling a ke> from his pocket and turning 
to the door, “I’ll ask the chief He — ” 

“No.” she said. 

Some quality in the tone of her voice made him whirl back to her: 
she was holding a gun pointed levclly at his heart. 

* “Listen carefully,” she said. “Either you let me in or I shoot you. 
You may try to shoot me first, if you can. You have that choice- ~ 
and no other Now decide.” 

His mouth fell open and the key dropped from his hand. 

“Get out of my way,” she said 

He shook his head frantically, pressing his back against the door. 
“Oh Christ, ma’am!” he gulped in the whine of a desperate plea, “1 
can’t shoot at you, seeing as you come from Mr Thompson! And 1 
can’t let you in against the word of Dr. Ferris! What am I to do? 
Fm only a little fellow! I'm only obeying orders! It's not up to me!” 

“It’s your life,” she said. 

“If you let me ask the chief, he’ll lei! me, he’ll - ” 

“J won't let you ask anyone.” 

“But how do I know that you really haye an order from Mr 
Thompson?” 

“You don’t. Maybe I haven't. Maybe I’m dating on my own— and 
you’ll be punished for obeying me. Maybe :I have— and you’ll be 
thrown in jail for disobeying. Maybe Dr, Ferris and Mr. Thompson 
agree about this. Maybe they don't— and you have to defy one or 
the other, 'These are the things you have to decide. There is no one 
to ask, no one to call, no one to tell you. You will have to decide 
them yourself.” 


1050 



"But 1 can't decide! Why me?" 

“Because it’s your body that’s barring my way." 

“But I can’t decide! Pm not supposed to decide!" 

‘Til count to three," she said. ‘ Then Pll shoot.” 

“Wait! Wait! I haven't said yes or no!” he cried, cringing tighter 
against the door, as if immobility of mind and body were his best 
protection. 

“One — ” she counted; she could see his eyes staling at her in 
terror — “Two--" she could see that the gun held less terror for him 
than the alternative she offered— “three." 

Calmly and impersonally, she, who would have hesitated to fire at 
an animal, pulled the trigger and fired straight at the heart of a man 
who had wanted to exist without the responsibility of consciousness. 

Her gun was equipped with a silencer: there was no sound to 
attract anyone’s attention, only ihe thud of a body falling at her feet. 

She picked up the key Irotn the ground— then waited for a few 
brief moments, as had been agreed upon. 

Francisco was first to join her, coming from behind a corner of 
the building, then Hank Rcaidcn. then Ragnar Danneskiold. There 
had been four guards posted at intervals among the trees, around 
the building. They were now disposed of* one was dead, three were 
left in the brush, bound and gagged 

She handed the key to Francisco without a word. He unlocked the 
door and went in. alone, leaving the door open to the width of an 
inch. The thiee others waited outside, by that opening. 

The hall was lighted by a single naked bulb stuck in the middle 
ot the ceiling. A guard sto«>d at the foot of the stairs leading to the 


second floor. v 4 f 

“Who are you?” he cried at the sight ot Francisco entering as it 
he owned the place “Nobody's supposed to come in here tonight! ’ 
“I did.” said Francisco. 

“Why did Rusty let you in?” 

“He "must have had his reasons." 

“He wasn’t supposed to!'’ . 

“Somebody has changed your suppositions ’ Francisco s eyes were 
taking a lightning inventory of the place. A second ^«>od on 

the landing at the turn of the stairs, looking down at them and 

listening. 

“What’s your business?” 

“Copper-mining." 

“Huh? I mean, who are you*" wu™ 

"The name's tew long to tell you. I’ll tell « to voui duel. 

S "/'m asking the questions!" But he backed a step away. "Don t . . . 

don’t you act like a big shot or I’ll- - ’ . . h prancis- 

"Hey. Pete, he is!" cried the second guard, paralysed by tranus 

^ThctoTone was struggling to ignore it: his voioegrew louder 
with the growth of his fear, as he snapped at Hanctsco. What are 

you sifter?*' . , „ 

"I said I’ll tell it to your chief. Where ts he ! 


1051 



‘Tm asking the questions!” 

‘Tm not answering them/’ 

“Oh, you’re not, are you?” snarled Pete, who had but one recourse 
when in doubt: his hand jerked to the gun on his hip. 

Francisco’s hand was too fast for the two men to see its motion, 
and his gun was too silent. What they saw and heard next was the 
gun flying out of Pete’s hand, along with a splatter of blood from 
his shattered fingers, and his muffled howl of pain. He collapsed, 
groaning. In the instant when the second guard grasped it. he saw 
that Francisco's gun was aimed at him 

“Don't shoot, mister!" he cried. 

“Come down here with your hands up.” ordered Francisco, hold- 
ing his gun aimed with one hand and waving a signal to the crack 
of the door with the other. 

By the time the guard descended the stairs, Rcarden was there to 
disarm him, and DanneskjtMd to tie his hands and feet. The sight of 
Dagny seemed to frighten him more than the rest; he could not 
understand it: the three men wore caps and windbreakers, and, but 
for their manner, could be taken for a gang of highwaymen; the 
presence of a lady was inexplicable. 

“Now.” said Francisco, “where is your chief?” 

The guard jerked his head in the direction of the stairs. “Up 
there.” 

“How many guards are there in the budding'" 

“Nine.” 

, “Where are they?” 

“One's on the cellar stairs. The others are all up there.” 

“Where?” 

“In the big laboratory. The one with the window.” 

“AH of them?” 

“Yes.” 

“What are these rooms?” He pointed at the doors leading off 
the hall. 

“They’re labs, too. They're locked for the night.” 

“Who’s got the key?” 

“Him.” He jerked his head at Pete. 

Rearden and Danneskjold took the key from Pete's pocket and 
hurried soundlessly to check the rooms, while Francisco continued. 
“Are there any other men in the building?” 

“No.” 

“Isn’t there a prisoner here 7 ” , 

“Oh . . . yeah, l guess so. There must be, or they woukln’t’ve kept 
us all on duty.” 

“Is he still here?” 

“That, l don’t know. They’d never tell usi’ 

“Is Dr. Ferris here?” 

“No. He left ten-fifteen minutes ago.” 

“Now, that laboratory upstairs- does it <j^>en right on the stair 

landing?” 

“Yes.” 

“How many doors are there?” 

1052 



“Three. It’s the one in the middle/’ 

“What are the other rooms?” 

“There’s the small laboratory on one side and Dr. Ferris' office 
on the other.” 

“Are there connecting doors between them?” 

“Yes.” 

Francisco was turning to his companions, when the guard said 
pleadingly, “Mister, can 1 ask you a question?” 

“Go ahead.” 

“Who are you?” 

He answered in the solemn tone of a drawing-room introduction 
“Francisco Domingo C arlos Andres Sebastidn d’Anconia .” 

He left the guard gaping at him and turned to a brief, whispered 
consultation with his companions. 

in a moment, it w'as Kcarden who went up the stairs — swiftly, 
soundlessly and alone. 

Cages containing rats and guinea pigs were stacked against the 
walls of the laboratory; they had been put there by the guards who 
were playing poker on the long laboratory table in the center. Six 
of them were playing, two were standing m opposite corners, watch- 
ing the entrance door, guns in hand It was Reardon’s face that saved 
him from being shot on sight when he entered: his face was too well 
known to them and too unexpected. He saw eight heads staring at 
him with recognition and with inability to believe what they were 
recognizing. 

He stood at the dooi, his hands in the pockets of his trousers, 
with the casual, confident manner ot a business executive. 

“Who is in charge here? ’ he asked m the politely abrupt voice of 
a man who does not waste lime. 

“You . . you’re not . . stammeied a lanky, surly individual at 

the card table. 

“I'm Hank Reardon, Are you the chief?” 

“Yeah* but where in bla/es do you some from”” 

“From New- York.” 

“What are you doing heie?” 

“Then I take it. you have not been notified.” 

“Should l have . , . ! mean, about what '" lhe swift, touchy, resent- 
ful suspicion that his superiors had slighted* his authority, was obvious 
in the chiefs voice. He was a tall, emaciated man. with jerky move- 
ments, a s«il low face and the restless, unfocused eyes of a drug addict. 

“About my business here ” 

“You . . . vou can't have any business here” he snapped, torn 
between the fear of a bluff and the fear ot having been left out ot 
some inifHirtant, top-level decision Aren't you a traitor and a de- 
serter and a - 

“1 see that you’re behind the limes, my good man.” 

The seven others in the room were staring at Reardon with an 
awed, superstitious uncertainty. Hie two who held guns still held 
them aimed at him in the impassive manner ot automatons. He did 
not seem to take notice of them. 

“What is it you say is your business here?” snapped the chief. 

1053 



*i am here to take charge of the prisoner whom you are to deliver 
to me.” 

“If you came from headquarters, you’d know that I’m not sup- 
posed to know anything about any prisoner — and that nobody t$ to 
touch him!” 

“Except me.” 

The chief leaped to his feet, darted to a telephone and seiyed the 
receiver. He had not raised it halfway to his ear when he dropped 
it abruptly with a gesture that sent a vibration of panic through the 
room: he had had time to hear that the telephone was dead and to 
know that the wires were cut. 

His look of accusation, as he whirled to Reardon, broke against the 
faintly contemptuous reproof of Reardon’s voice: “That's no way to 
guard a building — if this is what you allowed to happen. Better let me 
have the prisoner, before anything happens to him — if you don’t want 
me to report you for negligence, as well as insubordination.” 

The chief dropped heavily back on his chair, slumped lorward 
across the table and looked up at Rcarden with a glance that made 
his emaciated face resemble the animals that were beginning to stir 
in the cages. 

“ Who is the prisoner 7 ” he asked. 

“My good man,” said Rcarden, “If your immediate superiors did 
not see fit to tell you, I certainly will not.” 

“They didn’t see fit to tell me about your coming here, either!” 
yelled the chief, his voice confessing the helplessness of anger and 
broadcasting the vibrations of impotence to his men. “How do 1 
know you’re on the level? With the phone out of order, who's going 
to tell me? How am I to know what to do?” 

“That’s your problem, not mine.” 

* “I don’t believe you!” His cry was too shrill to project conviction. 
“I don't believe that the government would send you on a mission, 
when you’re one of those vanishing traitors and friends of John Galt 
who—” 

“But haven’t you heard?” 

“What?” 

“John Galt has made a deal with the government and has brought 
us all back.” 

“Oh, thank God!” cried one of the guards, the youngest. 

“Shut your mouth! You’re not to have any political opinions!” 
snapped the chief, and jerked back to Rcarden.' “Why hasn’t it been 
announced on the radio?” 

“Do you presume to hold opinions on when and how the govern- 
ment should choose to announce its policies?”? 

In the long moment of silence, they could l|ear the rustle of the 
animats clawing at the bars of their cages. { 

“1 think I should remind you,” said Reardfen, “that your job is 
not to question orders, but to obey them, that you are not to know 
or understand the politics of your superiors, that you are not to 
judge, to choose or to doubt.” 

“But I don’t know whether I’m supposed to obey vouV' 

“If you refuse, you’ll take the consequences,” 

1054 



Crouching against the table, the chief moved his glance slowly, 
appraisingly, from Reardon’s face to the two gunmen in the comers. 
The gunmen steadied their aim by an almost imperceptible move- 
ment, A nervous rustle went through the room. An animal squeaked 
shrilly in one of the cages. 

“I think 1 should also tell you," said Rearden, his voice faintly 
harder, “that 1 am not alone. My friends are waiting outside." 

"Where?" 


"All around this room." 

"How many?" 

"You’ll find out— -one way or the other." 

"Say, Chief," moaned a shaky voice from among the guards, "we 
don’t want to tangle with those people, they’re 

"Shut up!" roared the chief, leaping to his feet and brandishing 
his gun in the direction of the speaker. "You’re not going to turn 
yellow on me, any of you bastards!" He was screaming to ward off 
the knowledge that they had. He was swaying on the edge of panic, 
fighting against the realization that something somehow' had dis- 
armed his men. "There’s nothing to be scared of!" He was screaming 
it to himself, struggling to recapture the safety ot his only sphere; 
the sphere of violence. "Nothing and nobody! I’ll show- >ou!" He 
whirled around, his hand shaking at the end of hiN sweeping arm, 


and fired at Rearden . 

Some of them saw Rearden sway, his right hand gripping his left 
shoulder. Others, in the same instant, saw the gun drop out of the 
chiefs hand and hit the floor in time with his scream and with the 
spurt of blood from his wrist. Then nil of them saw Francisco d An- 
conia standing at the door on the left, his soundless gun still aimed 

All of them weie on their feet and had drawn their guns, but they 
lost that first moment, not daring to fire 
"l wouldn’t, if I were you, said Francisco. 

“Jesus 1 " gasped one ot the guards, struggling toi the memory; ot 
a name he niuld not capture. “That's . . that's the guy who blew 
Up all the copper mines in the world! 

“It is," said Rearden, , 

They had been backing involuntarily away from Franusco -,nd 
turned to see that Rearden still stood at the entrance door, with a 
pointed gun in his right hand and a dark stain spreading 01 h 

' e “Shoot^you bastards!" screamed the chief to the wavering men. 

“Whit are you waiting for? Shoot them 1 report 

one arm against the tabic, blood running out of the other. I .\\ npon 
any mTn who doesn't light! i'll have him sentenced to death for it! 

‘ti me out of here!” screamed the youngest, dashmg for the 
d He 0 thr?w Sifdoor open and sprang back: Dagny Taggart stood 

1055 



an invisible battle in the fog of their minds, disarmed by a sense of 
unreality in the presence of the legendary figures they had never 
expected to see, feeling almost as if they were ordered to fire at 
ghosts. 

“Drop your guns,” said Rearden. “You don't know why you're 
here. We do. You don’t know who your prisoner is. We do. You 
don't know why your bosses want you to guard him. We know why 
we want to get him out. You don't know the purpose of your fight. 
We know the purpose of ours. If you die, you won't know what 
you're dying for. If we do, we will,” 

“Don’t . . . don't listen to him!” snarled the chief. “Shoot! 1 order 
you to shoot!” 

One of the guards looked at the chief, dropped his gun and, raising 
his arms, backed away from the group toward Rearden. 

“God damn you!” yelled the chief, seized a gun with his left hand 
and fired at the deserter. 

In time with the fall of the man's body, the window burst into a 
shower of glass-— and from the limb of a tree, as from a catapult, 
the tall, slender figure of a man flew into the room, landed on its 
feet and fired at the first guard in reach. 

“Who are youV' screamed some terror-blinded voice, 

“Ragnar Danncskjold.” 

Three sounds answered him: a long, swelling moan of panic — the 
clatter of four guns dropped to the floor — and the bark ot the fifth, 
fired by a guard at the forehead of the chief. 

By the time the four survivors of the garrison began to reassemble 
the pieces of their consciousness, their figures were stretched on the 
floor, bound and gagged; the fifth one was left standing, his hands 
tied behind his back. 

“Where is the prisoner?” Francisco asked him. 

“In the cellar ... I guess.” 

“Who has the key?” 

“Dr. Ferris.” 

“Where are the stairs to the cellar 7 ” 

“Behind a door in Dr. Ferris’ office.” 

“Lead the way.” 

As they started, Francisco turned to Rearden. “Are you all 
right. Hank?” 

“Sure.” 

“Need to rest?” 

“Hell, no!” 

From the threshold of a door in Ferris' office. they looked down 
a steep flight of stone stairs and saw a guard! on the landing below. 

“Come here with your hands up!” ordered Francisco. 

The guard saw the silhouette ot a resol utef stranger and the glint 
of a gun; it was enough. He obeyed immediately; he seemed relieved 
to escape from the damp stone crypt. He wds left tied on the floor 
of the office, along with the guard who had led them. 

Then the four rescuers were free to fly down the stairs to the 
locked steel door at the bottom. They had acted and moved with 

1056 



the precision of a controlled discipline. Now, it was as if their inner 
reins had broken. 

Danneskjold had the tools to smash the lock. Francisco was first 
to enter the cellar, and his arm barred Dagny s way for the fraction 
of a second — for the length of a look to make certain that the sight 
was bearable — then he let her rush past him: beyond the tangle of 
electric wires, he had seen Galt’s lifted head and glance of greeting. 

She fell down on her knees by the side of the mattress. Galt looked 
up at her, as he had looked on their first morning in the valley, his 
smile was like the sound of a laughter that had never been touched 
by pain, his voice was soft and low 

“We never had to take any of it seriously, did we?” 

Tears running down her face, but her smile declaring a full, confi- 
dent, radiant certainty, she answered, “No, we never had to.” 

Rearden and Danneskjold were cutting his bonds. Francisco held 
a flask of brandy to Galt’s lips. Gait drank, and raised himself to 
lean on an elbow when his arms were free. “Give me a cigarette,” 
he said. 

Francisco produced a package of dollar-sign cigarettes. Gait’s hand 
shook a little, as he held a cigarette to the flame of a lighter, but 
Francisco's hand shook much more. 

Glancing at his eyes over the flame. Galt smiled and said in the 
tone of an answer to the questions Francisco was not asking, “Yes. 
it was pretty bad. but bearable — and the kind of voltage they used 
leaves no damage.” 

“HI find them some day, whoever they were . . . ' said rrancisco; 
the tone of his voice, flat, dead and barely audible, said the rest. 

“If you do, you'll find that there’s nothing left of them to kill. 

Galt glanced at the faces around him: he saw the intensity of the 
relief in their eyes and the violence of the anger in the grimness 
of their features: he knew in what manner they were now reliving 


he said. “Don't make it worse for yourself than it was 


T he 


his torture. 

“U’s over, 

Francisco turned his face away, ‘it s only that it was you . 
whispered, “von ... if it were anyone but you ... 

•‘But it had to be me. if they were to try their last, and they _vc 
tried, and" — he moved his hand, sweeping the twm-and the mean- 
ing of those who had made it— into the wastelands of the past 

^Franctsco 'nodded, his face still turned away, the violent grip of 
his finficrs clutching Galt’s wrist for a moment was his answer. 

Calf lifted himself to a silting post ure, slowly regaining^ 
his muscles He danced up at Dagny s face, as her arm shot forward 
to hdo hinvhc saw the struggle of her smile against the tension of 

could matter beside the sight of hls na ^. had endured Holding 
was living— against her knowledge of what it had endured, ncuamg 
h® ',‘n® h* raised his hand and touched the collar of her white 
sweater with his fingertips, in acknowledgment and »n reminder of 

1057 



the only things that were to matter from now on. The faint tremor 
of her tips, relaxing into a smile, told him that she understood. J 

DanneskjOld found Gall's shirt, slacks and the rest of his clothing, 
which had been thrown on the floor in a corner of the room. “Do 
you think you can walk, John?” he asked. 

“Sure,” 

While Francisco and Rearden were helping Galt to dress, Dan- 
neskjOld proceeded calmly, systematically, with no visible emotion, 
to demolish the torture machine into splinters. 

Galt was not fully steady on his feet, but he could stand, leaning 
on Francisco’s shoulder. The first few steps were hard, but by the 
time they reached the door, he was able to resume the motions of 
walking. His one arm encircled Francisco’s shoulders for support; 
his other arm held Dagny’s shoulders, both to gain support and to 
give it. 

They did not speak as they walked down the hill, with the darkness 
of the trees dosing in about them for protection, cutting off the dead 
glow of the moon and the deader glow in the distance behind them, 
in the windows of the State Science Institute. 

Francisco's airplane was hidden in the brush, on the edge of a 
meadow beyond the next hill. There were no human habitations for 
miles around them. There were no eyes to notice or to question 
the sudden streaks of the airplane’s headlights shooting across the 
desolation of dead weeds, and the violent burst of the motor brought 
to life by Danneskjflld, who took the wheel 

With the sound of the door slamming shut behind them and the 
forward thrust of the wheels under their feet. Francisco smiled tor 
the first time. 

“This Is my one and only chance to give you orders.” he said, 
helping Galt to stretch out in a reclining chair. “Now lie still, relax 
*hnd take it easy . . . You, too,” he added, turning to Dagny and 
pointing at the seat by Galt's side. 

The wheels were running faster, as if gaming speed and purpose 
and lightness, ignoring the impotent obstacles of small jolts from the 
ruts of the ground. When the motion turned to a long, smooth streak, 
when they saw the dark shapes of the trees sweeping down and 
dropping past their windows, Galt leaned silently over and pressed 
his lips to Dagny’s hand; he was leaving the outer world with the 
one value he had wanted to win from it. 

Francisco had produced a firsi-aid kit and was removing Rearden’s 
shirt to bandage his wound. Galt saw the tbjn red trickle running 
from Rearden’s shoulder down his chest. 

“Thank you, Hank,” he said. 

Rearden smiled. “I will repeat what you said when l thanked you, 
on our first meeting: ‘If you understand that I acted for my own 
sake, you know that no gratitude is required.!” 

*‘I will repeat,” said Galt, “the answer you gave me: "That is why 
I thank you.’ ” 

Dagny noticed that they looked at each other as if their glance 
were the handshake of a bond too firm to inquire any statement 
Rearden saw her watching them — and the faintest contraction of his 

1058 



eyes was like a smile of sanction, as if his glance were repeating to 
her the message he had sent her from the valley. 

They heard the sudden sound of Danneskjtild’s voice raised cheer- 
fully in conversation with empty space, and they realized that he was 

speaking over the plane’s radio: “Yes, safe and sound, all of us 

Yes, he s unhurt, just shaken a little, and resting, . . . No, no perma- 
nent injury. . . . Yes, we're all here. Hank Reardon got a flesh wound, 
but —he glanced over his shoulder — “but he's grinning at me right 
now. . . . Losses? I think we lost our temper for a few minutes back 
there, but we’re recovering. . . Don't try to beat me to Galt’s Gulch, 
I’ll land first- -and I’ll help Kay in the restaurant to fix your 
breakfast." 

“Can any outsiders hear hinV ? " asked Dagny. 

“No, said Francisco. “It s a frequency they're not equipped to 
get." 

“Whom is he talking to?" asked Galt. 

"To about half the male population of the valley," said Francisco, 
“or as many as we had space for on every plane available. They are 
flying behind us right now. Did you thmk any of them would stay 
home and leave you in the hands ot the looters? Wo were prepared 
to get you by open, armed assault on that Institute or on the Wayne- 
Falkland. if necessary. But we knew that in such case we would run 
the risk of their killing you when they saw that they were beaten. 
That’s why we decided that the four of us would first try it alone. 
Had we failed, the others would have proceeded with an open attack. 
They were waiting, half a mile away. We had m n posted among 
the trees on the hill, who saw us get out and relayed the word to 
the others. Ellis Wyatt was m charge. Incidentally, he's flying your 
plane. The reason we couldn't get to New Hampshire as fast as Dr. 
Ferris, is that we had to get our planes from distant, hidden landing 
places, while he had the advantage of open airports. Which, inciden- 
tally, he won't have much longer." 

“No," said Galt, “not much longer." 

“That was our only obstacle. The rest was easy. I'll tell you the 
whole story 1 later. Anyway, the four ot us were all that was necessary 
to beat their garrison." 

“One of these centuries." said Danneskjold, turning to them for 
a moment, “the brutes, private or public, who believe that they can 
rule their betters bv force, will learn the lesson of what happens 
when brute force encounters mind and force." 

“They've learned it." said Galt. "Isn't that the particular lesson 
you have been teaching them for twelve years?" 

“I? Yes. But the semester is over. Tonight was the last act of 
violence that PH ever have to perform. It was my reward for the 
twelve years. My men have now' started to build their homes in the 
valley. My ship is hidden where no one will find her, until I’m able 
to sell her for a much more civilized use. She'll be converted into a 
transatlantic passenger liner — an excellent one, even if of modest 
size. As for me, l will start getting ready to give a different course 
of lessons. I think PH have to brush up on the works of our teacher s 
tot teacher." 


1059 



Rearden chuckled. ‘Td like to be present at your first lecture on 
philosophy in a university classroom,’' he said. ‘Td like to see how 
your students will be able to keep their mind on the subject and 
how you’ll answer the sort of irrelevant questions I won't blame 
them for wanting to ask you.” 

‘T will tell them that they’ll find the answers in the subject” 

There were not many lights on the earth below. The countryside 
was an empty black sheet, with a few occasional flickers in the win- 
dows of some government structuies. and the trembling glow of can- 
dles in the windows of thriftless homes. Most of the rural population 
had long since been reduced to the life of those ages when artificial 
light was an exorbitant luxury, and a sunset put an end to human 
activity. The towns were like scattered puddles, left behind by a 
receding tide, still holding some precious drops ot electricity, but 
drying out in a desert of rations, quotas, controls and power-conser- 
vation rules. 

But when the place that had once been the source of the tide — 
New York City — rose in the distance before them, it was still ex- 
tending its tights to the sky, still defying the primordial darkness, 
almost as if, in an ultimate effort, in a final appeal for help, it were 
now stretching its arms to the plane that was crossing its sky. Invol- 
untarily, they sat up, as if at respectful attention at the death bed of 
what had been greatness. 

Looking down, they could see the last convulsions: the lights of 
the cars were darting through the streets, like animals trapped in a 
maze, frantically seeking an exit, the bridges were jammed with cars, 
the approaches to the bridges were veins of massed headlights, glit- 
tering bottlenecks stopping all motion, and the desperate screaming 
of sirens reached faintly to the height of the plane. The news of 
the continent’s severed artery had now engulfed the city, men were 
deserting their posts, trying, in panic, to abandon New York, seeking 
escape where all roads were cut off and escape was no longer 
possible. 

The plane was above the peaks of the skyscrapers when suddenly, 
with the abruptness ot a shudder, as if the ground had parted to 
engulf it, the city disappeared from the face of the earth. It took 
them a moment to realize that the panic had reached the power 
stations — and that the lights of New York had gone out. 

Oagny gasped. “Don’t look down!" Galt ordered sharply. 

She raised her eyes to his face. His face had that look of austerity 
with which she had always seen him meet tycts. 

She remembered the story Francisco had! told her: ‘*He had quit 
the Twentieth Century. He was living in a garret in a slum neighbor- 
hood. He stepped to the window and pointed at the skyscrapers of 
the city. He said that we bad to extinguish! the lights of the world, 
and when we would see the lights of New ?York go out, we would 
know that our job was done/’ 

She thought of it when she saw the thrte of them — John Galt, 
Francisco d’Anconia. Ragnar Danneskjitfd— look silently at one an- 
other for a moment. 

She glanced at Rearden; he was not looking down, he was looking 

1060 



ahead, as she had seen him look, at an untouched countryside* with 
a glance appraising the possibilities of action. 

When she looked at the darkness ahead, another memory rose in 
her mind— the moment when, circling above the Afton airport, she 
had seen the silver body of a plane rise like a phoenix from the 
darkness of the earth. She knew that now, at this hour, their plane 
was carrying all that was left of New York City. 

She looked ahead. I he earth would be as empty as the space 
where their propeller was cutting an unobstructed path — as empty 
and as free. She knew what Nat Taggart had felt at his start and 
why now, for the first time, she was following him in full loyalty: the 
confident sense of facing a void and of knowing that one has a 
continent to build. 

She felt the whole struggle of hei past rising before her and drop- 
ping away, leaving her here, on the height of this moment. She 
smiled -and the words in her mind, appraising and sealing the past, 
were the words of courage, pride and dedication, which most men 
had never understood, the words of a businessman's language: “Price 
no object.” 

She did not gasp and she felt no tremor when, in the darkness 
below, she saw a small string of lighted dots struggling slowly west- 
ward through the void, wilh the long, bright dash of a headlight 
groping to protect the safety ot its wav; she felt nothing, even though 
it was a train and she knew that it had no destination but the void. 

She turned to Galt He was watching her face, as it he had been 
following her thoughts. She saw the reflection of her smile in his. 
‘It's the end,” she said “It’s the beginning.* he answered 

Then they lay still* leaning back in their chairs, silently looking at 
each other. Then their persons filled each other's awareness, as the 
sum and meaning of the future— but the sum included the knowledge 
of all that had had to be earned, before the person of another being 
could come to embody the value of one's existence 

New York was f ai behind them, when the) heard Danneskjold 
answer a call from the radio: “Yes. he's awake 1 don't think he’ll 
sleep tonight. . . Yes. 1 think he can.” He turned to glance over 
his shoulder. “John. Dr. Akston would like to speak to you.” 

“What? Is he on one of those planes behind us?” 

“Certainly ” 

Galt leaped forward to sei/e the microphone. “Hello, Dr. Akston,” 
he said; the quiet, low tone of his voice was the audible image of a 
smile transmitted through space. 

“Hello, John.” The too-conscious vtcadiness ot Hugh Akston s 
voice confessed at what cost he had waited to learn whether he 
would ever pronounce these two words again, i just wanted to hear 
your voice . . , just to know that You’re all right 

Galt chuckled and -in the tone of a student proudly presenting a 
completed task of homework as proof ot a lesson well learned he 
answered* “Of course I am all right, Professor. I had to h*. A is A. 

♦ ♦ 

The locomotive of the ensthound Comet broke down in the middle 
of a desert in Arizona. It stopped abruptly, for no visible reason, 

1061 



like a man who had not permitted himself to know that he Was 
bearing too much: some overstrained connection snapped for good. 

When Eddie Willers called for the conductor, he waited a long 
time before the man came in* and he sensed the answer to his ques- 
tion by the look of resignation on the man's face. 

“The engineer is trying to find out what's wrong. Mr. Willers," he 
answered softly, in a tone implying that it was his duty to hope, but 
that he had held no hope for years. 

“He doesn't know?” 

“He's working on it." The conductor waited for a polite half- 
minute and turned to go, but stopped to volunteer an explanation, 
as if some dim, rational habit told him that any attempt to explain 
made any unadmitted terror easier to bear. “Those Diesels of ours 
aren't fit to be sent out on the road, Mr. Willers. They weren't worth 
repairing long ago." 

‘T know," said Eddie Willers quietly. 

The conductor sensed that his explanation was worse than none: 
it led to questions that men did not ask these days. He shook his 
head and went out. 

Eddie Willers sat looking at the empty darkness beyond the win- 
dow. This was the first eastbound Comet out ot San Francisco in 
many days: she was the child ol his tortured effort to re-establish 
transcontinental seivice. He could not tell what the past few days 
had cost him or what he had done to save the San Francisco terminal 
from the blind chaos ot a civil war that men were fighting with no 
concept of their goals: there was no way to icmembei the deals he 
had made on the basis ot the range of every shifting moment. He 
knew only that he had obtained immunity for the terminal from the 
leaders of three different waning (actions, that he had found a man 
for the post ot terminal manager who did not seem to have given 
up altogether; that he had started one more Taggart Cornel on her 
eastward run. with the best Diesel engine and the best crew available; 
and that he had boarded her tor his return journey to New York, 
with no knowledge of how long his achievement would last. 

He had never worked so hard; he had done his job as conscien- 
tiously well as he had always done any assignment, but it was as if 
he had worked in a vacuum, as if his energy had found no transmit- 
ters and had run into the sands ot . . . of some such desert as the 
one beyond the window of the Comet He shuddered: he felt a mo- 
ment's kinship with the stalled engine of the train. 

After a while, he summoned the conductor once more. “How is 
it going?'’ he asked. 

The conductor shrugged and shm»k his head. 

“Send Ihe fireman to a track phone Have* him tell the Division 
Headquarters to send us the best mechanic available." 

“Yes, sir," 

There was nothing to see beyond the windows; turning off the 
light* Eddie Willers could distinguish a gray spread dotted by (he 
black spots of cacti, with no start to it and no end. He wondered 
how men had ever ventured to cross it, and at what price, in the days 

1062 



when there were no trains. He jerked his head away and snapped on 
the light. 

It was only the fact that the Comet was in exile, he thought, that 
gave him this sense of pressing anxiety. She was stalled on an alien 
rail— on the borrowed track of the Atlantic Southern that ran 
through Arizona, the track they were using without payment. He 
had to get her out of here, he thought, he would not feel like this 
once they returned to then own rail But the junction suddenly 
seemed an insurmountable distance away: on the shore of the Missis- 
sippi, at the Taggart Bridge. 

No, he thought, that was not all. He had to admit to himself what 
images were nagging him with a sense of uneasiness he could neither 
grasp nor dispel; they were too meaningless to define and too inexpli- 
cable to dismiss. One was the image of a way station they had passed 
without stopping, more than two hours ago: he had noticed the 
empty platform and the brightly lighted windows of the small station 
building; the lights came from empty rooms, he had seen no single 
human figure, neither in the building nor on the tracks outside. The 
other image was of the next way station they had passed: its platform 
was jammed with an agitated mob. Now they were far beyond the 
reach of the light or sound of any station. 

He had to get the Comet out of heu\ he thought. He wondered 
why he felt it with such urgency and why it had seemed so ciucialiy 
important to re-establish the Comet's run. A mere handful of passen- 
gers was rattling in her empty cars, men had no place to go and no 
goals to reach. It was not tot their sake that he had struggled; he 
could not say for whose. Two phrases stood as the answer in his 
mind, driving him with the vagueness ot a piayer and the scalding 
force of an absolute One was: From Ocean to Ocean, forever — the 
other was; Don't let it go! . . . 

The conductor returned an hour later, with the fireman, whose 
face looked oddly grim. 

“Mr. Willers," said the fireman slow!). “Division Headquarters 
dt*es not answer." 

Eddie Willers sat up, his mind refusing to believe it, yet knowing 
suddenly that for some inexplicable reason this was what he had 
expected. “It’s impossible!" he said, his voice low, the fireman was 
looking at him, not moving. “The track phone must have been out 
of order," 

“No, Mr. Willers. It was not out of order. The line was alive all 
right. The Division Headquarters w'asn't I mean, there was no one 
there to answer, or else no one who caicd to." 

“But you know that that's impossible’" 

The fireman shrugged; men did not consider any disaster impossi- 
ble these days. , , . 

Eddie Willers leaped to his teet. “Go down the length ot the 
train," he ordered the conductor. “Knock on all the doors the occu- 
pied ones, that is — -and see whether there s an electrical engineer 
aboard.'* 

“Yes, sir." , . , e , 

Eddie knew that they felt, as he felt it, that they would find no 

1063 



such man, not among the lethargic, extinguished faces of the passen- 
gers they had seen “Come on,” he ordered, turning to the fireman 
They climbed together aboard the locomotive The gray-haired 
engineer was sitting in his chair, staring out at the cacti Ihc engine’s 
headlight had sta>ed on and it stretched out into the night, mo- 
tionless and straight, reaching nothing but the dissolving blur of 
crossties 

Let’s trv to find what s wrong” said f ddic, removing his coat, 
his voice half order half plea Let s try some more 

Yes sir said the engineer without icsentment or hope 
The engineer had exhausted his mtagei store of knowledge, he 
had checked every source of trouble ht could think of He went 
crawling over and under the machinery unsucwmg its parts and 
screwing them back again taking out pieces and replacing them, 
dismembering the motors at random like a child taking a clock apart 
but without the child s conviction that knowledge is possible 

lhe fireman kept leaning out ot the cab’s window, glancing at 
the black stillness and shivering as if from the night air that was 
growing colder 

Don t worry said l ddie Willcrs assuming 1 tone ot confidence 
We vc got to do our best but it wt fail they II send us help sooner 
or latei ITiey don t abandon trims in the middle ot nowhere ’ 
They didn t used to said the fireman 
Once in a while the engineer rnsed his grease smeared face to 
look at the grease smeared late and shut of 1 ddi< Willcrs What s 
the use Ml Willcrs } he asked 

* We can t let it go' frddie answered fie Rely lie knew dimlv that 
what he meant was moie than the ( omet and more than the 
railroad 

Moving trom the cab through the thr^c motor units and back to 
the cab again his hands bleeding his shirt sticking to his back bddic 
Willcrs was snuggling to remember everything he had ever known 
about engines anything ht had Rained in college and earlier any 
thing ht had picked up in those di\s when the station agents a! 
Rockdale St ition used to chase him off the rungs ot their lumbering 
switch engines lh< pieces connected to nothing his brain seemed 
jammed and tight he knew that motors were not his profession he 
knew that he did not know and that it was now a matter of life oi 
death for hirn to discovtr the knowledge H< was looking at the 
cylinders the blades the wires the control panels still winking with 
lights He was struggling not to allow into his mind the thought that 
was pressing against its periphery What wefe the chances and how 
long would it take — according to the rnutht mam d theory ot proba 
bifity -tor primitive men working by rule of thumb to hit the right 
combination ot parts and re create the* moKjr of this engine 7 

* What’s the use, Mr Willcrs moaned tt|e engineer 
4 We can’t let it go*” he cried 

He did not know how many houi s had passed when he heard the 
fireman shout suddenly 4 Mr Willcrs 1 Look 1 * 

The fireman was leaning out the window, pointing into the dark 
ness behind them 


1064 



. BAfie Witters looked. An odd little light was swinging jerkilv far 
in the distance; it seemed to be advancing at an imperceptible rate; 
it did not look like any sort of light he could identify. 

After a while, it seemed to him that he distinguished some large 
Mack shapes advancing slowly, they were moving in a line parallel 
with the track, the spot of light hung low over the ground swin gin g; 
he strained his ears, but heard nothing. 

Then he caught a feeble, muffled beat that sounded like the hoofs 
of horses. The two men beside him were watching the black shapes 
with a look of growing terror, as if some supernatural apparition 
were advancing upon them out of the desert night. In the moment 
when they chuckled suddenly, joyously, recognizing the shapes it 
was Eddie’s face that froze into a look of terror at the sight of a 
ghost more frightening than any they could have expected: it was a 
train of covered wagons. 

The swinging lantern jerked to a stop by the side the engine, ‘Hey, 
bud, can 1 give you a lilt?" called a man who seemed to be the 
leader; he was chuckling, ‘ Stuck, aren’t you?" 

The passengers of the Comet were peering out the windows; some 
were descending the steps and approaching. Women's faces peeked 
from the wagons, Irom among the piles of household goods; a baby 
wailed somewhere at the rear of the caravan. 

"Are you entry?" asked Eddie Willers. 


"No. I mean it, brother. We got plenty of room. We ll give you 
folks a lift -for a price— if you want to get out ot here." He was a 
lanky, nervous man. with loose gestures and an indolent voice, who 
looked like a side-show barker, 

'This is the Taggait C omet," said Eddie Willeis, choking. 

"The Comet, eh? Looks more like a dead caterpillar to me. What’s 
the matter, brother? You’re not going anywhere— and you can’t get 
there any more, even if you tried." 

"What do you mean?" 

"You don’t think you’re going to New York, do you?" 

"We are going to New York " 

"Then , . * then you haven't heard?" 

" What?' ' 


"Say, when was the tast time you spoke to any of your stations?" 

"I don’t know! . . . Heard whaiV' 

"That your Taggart Bridge is gone. Gone. Blasted to bits. Sound- 
ray explosion or something. Nobody knows exactly. Only there ain’t 
any bridge any more to cross the Mississippi. There ain’t any New 
York any more - leastways, not tor folks like you and me to reach." 

Eddie Willers did not know what happened next; he had fallen 
hack against the side of the engineer’s chair, staring at the open door 
of the motor unit; he did not know how long he stayed there, but 
when, at last, he turned his head, he saw that he was alone. 'The 
engineer and the fireman had left the cab. There was a scramble of 
voices outside, screams, sobs, shouted questions and the sound of 
the side-show barker’s laughter. 

Eddie pulled himself to the window of the cab: the Comet s pas- 
sengers and crew were crowding around the leader of the caravan 


1065 



and his semi-ragged companions; he was waving his loose arms in 
gestures of command. Some of the better-dressed ladies from the 
Comet — whose husbands had apparently been first to make a deal— 
were climbing aboard the covered wagons, sobbing and clutching 
their delicate make-up cases. 

“Step right up, folks, step right up!” the barker was yelling cheer- 
fully. “We’ll make room for everybody! A bit crowded, but moving— 
better than being left here for coyote fodder! The day of the iron 
horse is past! Alt we got is plain, old-fashioned horse! Slow, but 
sure!” 

Eddie Willers climbed halfway down the ladder on the side of the 
engine, to see the crowd and to be heard. He waved one arm, hang- 
ing on to the rungs with the other. “You’re not going, are you?” he 
cried to his passengers. “You’re not abandoning the Comet?” 

They drew' a little away from him, as if they did not want to look 
at him or answer. They did not want to hear questions their minds 
were incapable of weighing. He saw the blind faces oi panic. 

“What's the matter with the grease-monkey?” asked the barker, 
pointing at Eddie 

“Mr. Willers,” said the conductor softly, “it's no use . . 

“Don’t abandon the Comet!” cried Eddie Wipers. “Don’t let it 
go! Oh God. don't let it go!” 

“Are you crazy ?” cried the barker "You’ve no idea what's going 
on at your railroad stations and headquarters* They're running 
around like a pack of chickens with their heads cut off! 1 don’t think 
there’s going to be a railroad left m business this side of the Missis- 
sippi, by tomorrow morning!” 

"Belter come along. Mr. Willers,” said the conductor 

“No!” cried Eddie, clutching the metal rung as il he wanted his 
hand to grow fast to it. 

The barker shrugged. “Well, it’s your funeral!” 

“Which way are you going?” asked the engineer, not looking at 
Eddie. 

“Just going, brother! Just looking for some place to stop . . . 
somewhere. We’re from Imperial Valley. California, The ‘People’s 
Party’ crowd grabbed the crops and any food we had in the cellars. 
Hoarding, they called it So we just picked up and went. Got to 
travel by night, on account of the Washington crowd. . . . We’re just 
looking for some place to live. . . . You’re welcome to come along, 
buddy, if you’ve got no home — or else we can drop you off closer 
to some town or another.” 

The men of that caravan — thought Eddie indifferently — looked too 
mean-minded to become the founders of 4 secret, free settlement, 
and not mean-minded enough to become a |ang of raiders; they had 
no more destination to find than the motionless beam of the head- 
light; and, like that beam, they would dissolve somewhere in the 
empty stretches of the country. 

He stayed on the ladder, looking up a$ the beam. He did not 
watch while the last men ever to ride the Taggart Comet were trans- 
ferred to the covered wagons. 


1066 



The conductor went last. "Mr. Willers!” he called desperately. 
44 Co«iW5 along!” * 7 

“No” said Eddie. 

The side-show barker waved his arm in an upward sweep at Ed- 
die s figure on the side of the engine above their heads, “t hope you 
know what you're doing!” he cried, his voice half-threat half-plea 
“Maybe somebody will come this way to pick you up-next week 
or next month! Maybe! Who’s going to, these days?” 

“Get away from here,” said Eddie Willers. 

He climbed back into the cab— -when the wagons jerked forward 
and went swaying and creaking off into the night. He sat in the 
engineer's chair of a motionless engine, his forehead pressed to the 
useless throttle. He felt like the captain of an ocean liner in distress, 
who preferred to go down with his ship rather than be saved by the 
canoe of savages taunting him with the superiority of their craft. 

Then, suddenly, he felt the blinding surge of a desperate, righteous 
anger. He leaped to his feet, seizing the throttle. He had to start this 
train; in the name of some victory that he could not name, he had 
to start the engine moving. 

Past the stage of thinking, calculation or (ear, moved by some 
righteous defiance, he was pulling levers at random, he was jerking 
the throttle back and forth, he was stepping on the dead man’s pedal, 
which was dead, he was groping to distinguish the form of some 
vision that seemed both distant and dose, knowing only that his 
desperate battle was fed by that vision and was fought for its sake. 

Don’t let it go! his mind was crying- while he was seeing the 
streets of New York — Don’t let it go! — while he was seeing the lights- 
of railroad signals— Don’t let it go — while he was seeing the smoke 
rising proudly from factory chimneys, while he was struggling to cut 
through the smoke and reach the vision at the root of these visions. 

He was pulling at coils of wire, he was linking them and tearing 
them apart — while the sudden sense of sunrays and pine trees kept 
pulling at the aimers of his mind. Dagny! -he heard himself crying 
soundlessly —Dagny, tn the name of the best within us! . . He was 
jerking at futile level's and at a throttle that had nothing to move. . . 
Dagny! — he was crying to a twelve-yeai old girl in a sunlit clearing 
of the woods- in the name ol the best within us, l must now start 
this train! . . . Dagny, that is what it was . . . and you knew it, then, 
but l didn't . . . you knew it when you turned to look at the rails. . . . 

1 said, “not business or earning a living” . . . but. Dagny, business 
and earning a living and that in man which makes it possible — tlun 
is the best within us, that was the thing to defend . . in the name 
of saving it, Dagny, 1 must now start this train . . . 

When he found that he had collapsed on the floor of the cab and 
knew that there was nothing he could do here any longer, he rose 
and he climbed down the ladder, thinking dimly of the engine’s 
wheels, even though he knew that the engineer had checked them. 
He felt the crunch of the desert dust under his feet when he let 
himself drop to the ground. He stood still and, in the enormous 
silence* he heard the rustle of tumbleweeds stirring in the darkness, 
hke the chuckle of an invisible army made free to move when the 

1067 



Comet was not. He heard a sharper rustle close by — and he saw the 
small gray shape of a rabbit rise on its haunches to sniff at the steps 
of a car of the Taggart Comet. With a jolt of murderous fury, he 
lunged in the direction of the rabbit, as if he could defeat the ad* 
vance of the enemy in the person of that tiny gray form. The rabbit 
darted off into the darkness — but he knew that the advance was not 
to be defeated. 

He stepped to the front of the engine and looked up at the letters 
TT. Then he collapsed across the rail and lay sobbing at the foot of 
the engine, with the beam of a motionless headlight above him going 
off into a limitless night. 

* * 

The music of Richard Halley s Fifth Concerto streamed from his 
keyboard, past the glass of the window, and spread through the air, 
over the lights of the valley. It was a symphony of triumph. The 
notes flowed up, they spoke of rising and they were the rising itself, 
they were the essence and the form of upward motion, they seemed 
to embody every human act and thought that had ascent as its mo- 
tive. It was a sunburst of sound, breaking out of hiding and spreading 
open. It had the freedom of release and the tension of purpose. It 
swept space clean and left nothing but the joy of an unobstructed 
effort. Only a faint echo within the sounds spoke of that from which 
the music had escaped, but spoke in laughing astonishment at the 
discovery that there was no ugliness or pain, and there never had 
had to be. It was the song of an immense deliverance. 

The lights ot the valley tell in glowing patches on the snow still 
covering the ground. There were shelves of snow on the granite 
ledges and on the heavy limbs of the pines. But the naked branches 
of the birch trees had a faintly upward thrust, as if in confident 
promise of the coming leaves of spring. 

The rectangle oi light on the side ol a mountain was the window 
of Mulligan’s study. Midas Mulligan sat at his desk, with a map and 
a column of figures before him. He was listing the assets of his bank 
and working on a plan of projected investments. He was noting down 
the locations he was chousing: “New York — Cleveland — C hicago . . . 
New York — Philadelphia . . . New York . . New York . . , New 
York . . 

The icclangle of light at the bottom ot the valley was the window 
of Danneskjdld’s home, Kay Ludlow sat before a mirror, thoughtfully 
studying the shades of film make-up, spread open in a battered case. 
Ragnar Danneskjold lay stretched on a couch, reading a volume of 
the works of Aristotle: “ . . . for these truths hold good for everything 
that is, and not for some special genus apari from others. And all 
men use them, because they are true of being qua being. , , . For a 
principle which every one must have who unperstands anything that 
is, is not a hypothesis, . . . Evidently then isuch a principle is the 
most certain of all; which principle this is, l#t us proceed to say. It 
is, that the same attribute cannot at the same time belong and not 
belong to the same subject in the same respect. . . 

The rectangle of light in the acres of a farm was the window of 
the library of Judge Narragansett. He sat at a table, and the light of 

1068 



his lamp fell on the copy of an ancient document. He had marked 
and crossed out the contradictions in its statements that bad once 
been the cause of its destruction. He was now adding a new clause 
to its pages. Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of 
production and trade . 

The rectangle of light in the midst of a forest was the window of 
the cabin of Francisco d’Anconia. Francisco lay stretched on the 
floor, by the dancing tongues of a tire, bent over sheets of paper, 
completing the drawing ot his smelter. Hank Rearden and Elhs 
Wyatt sat by the fireplace. “John will design the new locomotives,” 
Rearden was saying, “and Oagny will run the first railroad between 
New York and Philadelphia. She--” And. suddenly, on hearing the 
next sentence, Francisco threw his head up and burst out laughing, 
a laughter of greeting, triumph and release. They could not hear the 
music of Halley's Fifth Concerto now flowing somewhere high above 
the roof, but Francisco's laughter matched its sounds. Contained m 
the sentence he had heard. Francisco was seeing the sunlight of 
spring on the open lawns of homes across the country', he was seeing 
the sparkle of motors, he was seeing the glow of the steel in the 
rising frames of new skyscrapers, he was seeing the eyes ot youth 
looking at the future with no uncertainty or fear. 

The sentence Rearden had uttered was: 'She will probably try' to 
take the shirt off my back with the freight rates she's going to charge, 
but — I’ll be able to meet them.” 

The taint glitter of light weaving slowly through space, on the 
highest accessible ledge of a mountain, was the starlight on the 
strands of Gait’s hair. He stood looking, not at the valley below, but 
at the darkness of the world beyond its walls. Dagny’s hand rested 
on his shoulder, and the wind blew her hair to blend with his. She 
knew why he had wanted to walk through the mountains tonight 
and what he had stopped to consider. She knew what words were 
his to speak and that she would be first to hear them. 

They could not see the world beyond the mountains, there was 
only a void of darkness and rock, but the darkness was hiding the ruins 
of a continent: the roofless homes, the rusting tractors, the iightless 
streets, the abandoned rail. But far m the distance, on the edge of the 
earth, a small flame was waving in the wind, the defiantly stubborn 
flame of Wyatt’s Torch, twisting, being torn and regaining its hold, 
not to be uprooted or extinguished. It seemed to be calling and 
waiting for the words John Galt was now to pronounce. 

“The road is cleared.” said Galt. “We are going back to the 
world.” 

He raised his hand and over the desolate earth he traced in space 
the sign of the dollar. 


1069 



ABOUT THE AUTHOR 

“My personal life,” says Ayn Rand, “is a postscript to my novels; it 
consists of the sentence; And [ mean it/ I have always lived by the 
philosophy I present in my books — and it has worked for me, as it 
works for my characters. The concretes differ, the abstractions are 
the same. 

“I decided to be a writer at the age of nine, and everything l have 
done was integrated to that purpose. I am an American by choice 
and conviction. I was born in Europe, but l came to America because 
this was the country based on my moral premises and the only coun- 
try where one could be fully free to write. I came here alone, after 
graduating from a European college. I had a difficult struggle, earn- 
ing my living at odd jobs, until l could make a financial success of 
my writing. No one helped me, nor did I think at any time that it 
was anyone's duty to help me, 

“In college, l had taken history as my major subject, and philoso- 
phy as my special interest; the first — in order to have a factual knowl- 
edge of men's past, for my future writing; the second - -in order to 
achieve an objective definition of my values. I found that the first 
could be learned, but the second had to be done by me. 

“I have held the same philosophy I now hold, for as far back as 
1 can remember. I have learned a great deal through the yeais and 
expanded my knowledge of details, of specific issues, of definitions, 
of applications — and f intend to continue expanding it— but I have 
never had to change any of my fundamentals. My philosophy, in 
essence, is the concept of man as a heroic being, with his own happi- 
ness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement 
*as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute. 

“The only philosophical debt 1 can acknowledge is to Aristotle. I 
most emphatically disagree with a great many parts of his philoso- 
phy — but his definition of the laws of logic and of the means of 
human knowledge is so great an achievement that his errors are 
irrelevant by comparison. You will find my tribute to him in the 
titles of the three parts of ATLAS SHRUGGED. 

“My other acknowledgment is on the dedication page of this novel. 
I knew what values of character I wanted to find in a man. I met 
such a man —and we have been married for twenty-eight years. His 
name is Frank O'Connor. 

“To all the readers who discovered The Fountainhead and asked 
me many questions about the wider application of its ideas, l want 
to say that I am answering these questions injthe present novel and 
that The Fountainhead was only an Overture to ATLAS 
SHRUGGED. 

“I trust that no one will tell me that men such as I write about 
don't exist. That this book has been written-«-and published — is my 
proof that they do.” 


1070 
